ladies and gentlemen the fact that  something is stupid the fact that  something is shallow  doesn't mean that it's not important  especially  in the sphere of politics  political judgments  involve decisions we make about  more and less  decisions of relative priority relative  privation  relative good  and relative evil do you have a whole  lot of respect for al gore  when al gore dies we all got to die  someday when there's a funeral for al  gore are you going to hug your  grandchildren to you tightly and say he  was such a good man he was such an  inspiration to me al gore  in 2022 is vegan since about 2013 he has  publicly identified as vegan is al gore  an inspiration to you do you look up to  al gore  you think  about the history of afghanistan  when you think  about the fate of afghanistan where  today women are again being forcibly  wrapped from head to toe in the most  restrictive  of uh islamic garb where women have lost  the right to show their faces in public  or even to show a tiny window onto their  their eyes when you think about  the thousand-year history of afghanistan  500 years leading up to 2001  500 years after 2001.  the difference  between al gore  and george w bush  really matters  now  i wasn't born yesterday i know some bad  things about al gore  you don't you don't have to look under  any rocks okay if you just if you just  get interested in the politics of that  era  you're gonna learn some bad things about  al gore if al gore were a personal  friend of mine  i'd probably say that he was a bad man i  probably i just probably i might be  friends with him anyway he could be  friends with someone you think is kind  of morally a bad person or what have you  um  there are probably numerous ways in  which ethically  i could find fault with  al gore  when you compare al gore to george w  bush and i remember vividly the cynicism  of the time i remember newspaper  articles  boldly and self-righteously proclaiming  that there was no point in voting  because there was no meaningful  difference between the two options you  were being presented with you know al  gore  versus uh  george w bush really really there was a  lot of that i think that was the  uh you know the spirit of kurt cobain  still kind of haunting the world what  was his genre of music called i forgot  grunge yeah the spirit of seattle  that hyper resignation hyper fatuous  hyper passive you know uh seattle rock  view of the world is still  still kind of dominant in pop culture  this sense of resignation to one's fate  that there was no difference you could  make in the world okay  looking back now  and knowing the moral character of  george w bush the intellectual caliber  of george w bush in contrast to al gore  al gore  who has published  numerous books  on ecology  do i think his books on ecology are good  do i think they're brilliant do i think  they're inspirational do i even think  they're morally or ethically wonderful  no  again when al gore dies i'm not going to  hug my daughter to me and say oh you  don't know you don't know what a  wonderful man alcorn was  i'll get morgan perhaps but then it'll  be my grandchildren who knows how long a  life they'll have what have you  um  this is not my relationship to al gore  but if you think we can't judge if you  think we shouldn't judge if you think  who am i to judge  these distinctions of of better or worse  all right  the united states of america would be a  dramatically different country today  if we had endured  eight years under the management of al  gore instead of george w bush and it is  impossible to exaggerate  what a different place central asia  would be  with afghanistan at its center  if al gore had been president of the  united states in  2001. all right  so it's a high-stakes game  we're playing in politics when we make  decisions as an isolated individual and  make a decision on the scale of a  society of millions and it's a  high-stakes game  where you place your bet  very often based on these quite  fine  judgments and distinctions right like  judgments like  what kind of person  is alcor  and  i want to say this up front  you know the fact that something is  impossible  doesn't mean it's not worth doing  not in politics baby  [Laughter]  and we have to think really deeply about  the way in which our preconceptions  about what's possible and what's  impossible shape our  short-term decisions and our commitment  to long-term plans and outcomes it's  very easy when you're a little child to  get frustrated at the piano bench and  say this is impossible i can't learn to  play  piano you know little kids react away to  all kinds of challenges  um  it's impossible it's impossible i can't  do it it's impossible  you know and let's let's be real here i  mean i'm jumping ahead a little bit in  terms of the topics i want to cover here  i understand the frustration people have  with a transition to a vegan diet as an  individual i understand the transition  people have above me i understand their  frustration with a a parallel transition  to adopting the politics of veganism the  pursuit of a vegan planet whatever you  want to imagine this uh the pursuit of a  world without slaughterhouses whatever  whatever you want to define the end goal  of veganism i understand  both on the immediate scale  it's impossible to buy a bean burrito in  canada that's not going to give you 12  hours of indigestion  like for real i'm vegan i sympathize  with people who say that they find it  impossible to get enough protein i've  lived in different countries all around  the world i know there's the standard  thing where vegans just scoff and  dismiss  complaints about how difficult it is to  get enough protein i don't i neither  scoff nor dismiss it i have a huge tub  in the background there of a vegan  protein supplement i eat massive amounts  of protein every day but i take it i  take it as a protein powder to  supplement the rest of my diet you know  um  [Music]  in that childish sense it's very easy to  sort of  hit a wall come to the limit of your own  of your own patience  and feel that this is impossible  you know sometimes you got to sit down  with a little kid and say  in the whole world  how many people have learned to play the  piano  how many people  this year  on planet earth  have learned to play the piano in just  in just one year you can do it  and i know you can  over one million people  per year  learn  to play the piano it's not everybody and  you know if you even think of it as a  percentage of the population like how  many people as a percentage population  are proficient in playing the piano  right now you know whether or not she  learned it as a child or stuff but who  today can sit up and do ragtime on the  piano and sit up and really  belt out a piano roll okay i don't know  if it's five percent i don't know if  it's one percent i mean it's  it's a small it's not the majority of  people if you have a democracy it's not  like more than 50 percent of people have  mastered the piano when currently have  that  skill  right okay but that's very different  from a judgment about what's possible  and what's impossible if it's possible  for one percent right it's possible for  you you can  do it the question is will you  right 100 of people can learn to play  the piano  but will you  are you going to be part of the one  percent that actually does it  right you talk about languages this way  learning chinese  you think it's impossible  it's hard learning chinese is hard okay  how many people learn chinese every year  you know of course of course you can  will you  are you gonna be one people  how about cree how about ojibwe how  about den a  how about the language of the inuit  inducted to whatever you want to call  you can  anyone can like in principle  there is no  language in the world that a child  cannot learn children can learn these  languages children  can learn to play the piano it seems so  hard but millions of children can do it  and millions of children do of course  you can do it  how hard is it  to adopt a vegan diet compared to  learning to play the piano how hard is  it to master the discipline of living  with a vegan diet whether you use a you  know a box of protein powder like i have  in the background there or not because  you don't have to you can learn how to  boil beans properly there are certain  skills yeah melissa just ate some uh  some lima beans and so on whatever you  don't have to but like let's calibrate  first of all this notion of the  impossible if you're saying this is  impossible  right everything we're talking about in  that human individual scale i know it's  hard  getting along with your parents when  you're vegan is hard getting along maybe  with your boyfriend or girlfriend  getting along with your roommates oh  getting along in the army  you know you can have a vegan diet and  be there i get it okay learning the  piano while you're in the army is hard  learning the piano and not  making your roommates angry at you  because you're playing the piano all  night and keeping them awake or  interrupting they want to read a book  and you're playing the piano all the  time you know you're practicing the  piano  that's hard too right learning chinese  is it is so much harder to learn the  piano it is so much harder to learn  chinese it's so much harder to learn an  indigenous language on the edge of  extinction whether that's an indigenous  language in north america or myanmar or  what have you an indigenous minority  language that's  hard  okay  the life of a vegan as an isolated  individual all right on this scale  before if we're calibrating the claim  it's not impossible right and relative  to these other things it's not hard at  all and yet what we deal with all the  time in discussing veganism our large  gallerism scale has everything to do  with this conception  of the possible and the impossible and  really what we're talking about  is the thinkable  and the unthinkable  you have to take people hand by hand  hand in hand you have to hold people by  the hand and lead them through a kind of  philosophical process of discovery  whereby  the unthinkable becomes thinkable now on  the small scale i've already kind of  described that to you this is just two  people talking so i mean by a small  scale  right the way in which a parent maybe  has to sit with a child and say look  well you know  your cousin steve  he thought it was impossible to learn  the piano it was really hard for him at  first and look at him now you know do  you remember  last christmas he came over and he  played the piano and everyone sang with  him he'd only been studying for three  years and he could play the piano that  well after three years like i want you  to visualize how easy this is going to  be for you once you've got the knack  down i want you to realize what's on the  horizon what's attainable what can be  accomplished with a certain amount of  work and guys look i'm  i'm not glorifying learning the piano  they it may be a complete waste your  time to learn the piano it's just an  example  of how something that seems insuperable  impossible to overcome right you can  talk through with a child the stages  they're gonna go through it's gonna be  hard and then it's gonna become easy in  this way and then this this is what it's  going to be like to gain proficiency in  something and that child me  from what as a child  what do you have to compare it to what  other process that they've been through  where they've mastered something that  seemed impossible and now they can do it  thoughtlessly effortlessly you know they  can so easily just glance at sheet music  and translate it into a live performance  right that's level of proficiency you  get to with piano with this moment to  moment  ability now learning a language is a lot  like that like that too in some ways and  you know certainly with a language as  hard as chinese it's useful to talk  through with someone realistically  here's what you should expect over the  next five years and over the next 10  years because it's so hard to get up to  a real level of proficiency in chinese  that's such a long struggle with with an  easier language like italian or  something or spanish it's probably a  very different conversation  but you know yes you know that's  ridiculous  yes you can learn spanish you can learn  cree you can learn ojibwe you can you  can learn  indigenous language in mexico et cetera  down south you can you can't now will  you  you know  this becomes totally  about whether or not you care  enough  to do it  but you don't want to think of yourself  as an uncaring person you don't want to  think of yourself  as an evil person so instead of posing  the problem in terms of your own  indolence in terms of your own lack of  feeling  your own lack of passion if you like  right isn't it convenient to instead  talk about what's possible and  impossible  everything i've just said we can repeat  with very few alterations when we're  talking about the political process of  what can be attained politically for  veganism and what can be attained  politically  for ecology  what can be attained politically for  human health  you know for me veganism is not  primarily about human health but it's a  factor folks  partly veganism is a challenge like  convincing people to quit smoking  cigarettes like convincing people to  quit smoking marijuana like convincing  people to quit alcohol there is a human  quality of life  uh public health aspect to it although  for me this is mostly about ethics  ecology  so on and so forth and what kind of  voice you want to be you know  i realize  that this seems  impossible to you it's not impossible  it's unthinkable and i can take you know  holding hands  and we can go through this  philosophically and something  unthinkable can become thinkable you can  learn to understand it you know in my  terms and again i'm not saying it's  going to be easy but i mean i think  playing the piano is a good a good  example because you can you can  visualize it so clearly the level of  skill  what people are doing with their hands  and what people are doing with their  brain if you sit them down in front of a  piece of sheet music they've never seen  before and they've got to do a reading  people say you know they just read it  interpret it and then transform that  into music  people get so good at it they can do it  when they're drunk you see people who  are blind drunk sit down at a piano and  belt out this amazing  music i'm i'm not endorsing either one  i'm not saying you should devote your  life to the piano but like the level of  skill you accomplish and then take  for granted okay this is so much more  difficult and so much so much more  difficult to really visualize than  what's involved with veganism personally  or politically right and yet that  all of us take for granted the  impossible becomes  possible that's that's we're dealing  with in this video oh guys i do see your  i do see your comments as they come in  if you have something intelligent to say  you can make a comment if you want to  hit the thumbs up button it will help  more people join the conversation now  because they'll discover the live stream  what's happening and it will help people  to discover the video later so i do  appreciate it if you take the time to  thumbs up frankly on any of my videos by  the way if you know anyone who would  benefit from this discussion a lot of  you do a lot of you are vegans i know  who you are watching this video a lot of  you are vegans who are connected to  other vegans on facebook through  facebook groups your vegans who are  connected to their vegans on reddit or  what have you  if it's going to be useful to people  share it share the link you probably  have friends on instagram who think  about and struggle with some of these  same issues again i'm about to disclose  more explicitly what i'm talking about  i don't tell you to share the link with  people who don't don't want to hear it  i'm not saying to advertise this to the  public there is a small  segment of the public who will really  benefit from joining in this  conversation  either now or in retrospect you know  either now we're watching the video uh  five years ago and again guys  i'm not a reckless egomaniac about this  but the discussion we've already had in  the last 18 minutes  you will neither find this quality of  conversation or this quantity of  conversation on any other youtube  channel or any other podcast okay  there's nobody else in the internet in  the english language at least doing it  like this and i doubt there's anyone  in chinese okay so i got um  i got a message it's an instagram  message  and a lot of you will hear things like  this  all the time right  i don't hear it very often because  people find me intimidating  which is good  so yeah you guys can also comment if  you've heard this kind of thing from  your own friends or relatives you may  have heard it from people within the  vegan movement who are now ex-vegan  people who were vegan activists in the  past  and quit so i'm just going to quote this  verbatim to you all right quote as for  being vegan i understand the health  benefits i have been vegetarian and  vegan while i worked at whole foods all  the way through my college years  but the conundrum i constantly ran into  was this  most vegans so there are some errors  here most vegans focus is to refuse the  use of animal products  but i met very few who realized how  nearly impossible it would be  do they not eat fruit too  because the skin is shined with the  shellac of dead insects  do they build their own houses because  the wood caulk used in linoleum uses  some parts of horse glue  do they not drink water out of the sink  because part because in some states some  of the drinking water uh uses filtration  filtration systems with animal bone  shards to purify and clean the water so  i just mentioned the use of uh it's bone  char is really what it means that is  very rare for water  but for wine like for red wine very  common for the production of sugar very  common for the production of beer beer  they use in glass i'm sorry i'm  confusing that there but definitely wine  and sugar this use of filtration uh  through through bone  remains is common obviously i'm not  saying nowhere on earth uses it for  water but that's that's a relatively  great example but anyway it's it's a in  its way it's uh it's a legitimate  example so  um already sir that's not the end of his  his  uh comment to me now  you know there is a difference between  reasoning on a chalkboard and reasoning  in the real world there's a very false  kind of fatalism that comes out of  examples like the one i just mentioned i  was alive at that time i was paying  attention to politics so this would have  been the election  during the year 2000 maybe already in  the year 1999 american elections kind of  go on forever so 1999 and 2000 there  were all these people saying it was  pointless the decision they were being  presented with whether they should elect  george w bush or al gore  uh and you can imagine well the whole  system is corrupt and that there was  really no ethical difference between  these two men there's no particular  policy that one represents the other  doesn't uh represent or something that  really things would be more or less the  same on planet earth or more or less the  same within the united states of america  if they elected al gore instead of uh  electing george w bush okay so now look  my point is regarded in isolation any  one of those points i'll give you a  legitimate or legitimate enough a reason  for for saying this um it was true  hilariously  at the time that the promises being made  about campaign finance reform were very  similar between george w bush and alcor  the reason i say it's hilarious is  none of those reforms ever happened  so both al gore  and george w bush they were not offering  exactly the same uh set of reforms but  they were both they were both  recognizing that the election system  they had was corrupt that it needed to  be improved and specifically the way  money is given to politicians the way  fundraising happens the way money is  collected that that needed to be  reformed and that was debated quite a  large percentage of the time that al  gore spent debating george w bush was on  campaign finance forum and this is  probably not the only example you could  go through a whole list of policies and  prerogatives and priorities where the  two men might have seemed similar they  said similar things are made  made similar promises so my point is not  that this is  a totally counterfactual totally without  factual basis to say you know  you could also do an analysis of the  type of education these two men had or  you could list uh they both breathe air  and drink water what are all the things  george w bush and al gore have in common  or the way in which they're  indistinguishable from each other as  political candidates and then  express your  exasperation your indifference to making  the decision between them now if your  claim is here i mean this is several  steps further into absurdity right  okay if your claim is  both people who eat meat and vegans  live in wooden structures  and that wood  contains some glue some adhesive  that contains some gelatin  from horse hooves  okay so you're saying  there are four  there's no important difference between  george w bush and alcohol  like therefore  there's no difference between slitting  the throat of a cow  to begin with breeding a cow raising it  in captivity having it live its whole  life on a concrete floor and a metal  cage  in a shed and they're under a steel sky  right having this animal tormented from  the day it's born of the day it dies  living this this life  so utterly different from what it would  experience in in the wild in nature  right  ensuring the perpetual misery of this  animal in captivity and then slitting  its throat cutting into pieces and  eating it so if you have two households  right one of which is vegan and one of  which eats meat three meals a day every  day  okay  you think or you're claiming or you're  asserting that there's no important  difference between them there's no  political difference between them  because both of these households have  wood  that contains glue  made from the the hooves of a horse  this is the kind of resignationism  you're you're engaged in right now i've  talked about this under many different  headings you know this this kind of  misconception about politics part of  what we're dealing with here is the gap  between chalkboard reasoning and real  world political reasoning  um i have seen by the way both democrat  and republican  politicians right now both members of  the democrat party and proven uh  politicians arguing that there's no  ethical difference between the  government of vladimir putin and russia  and the government in ukraine  now whether they're doing this cynically  or sincerely it really is a parallel  sort of thing they're able to say for  example they're able to say well look at  the lack of freedom of the press in  ukraine look at the corrupt elections in  ukraine they're able to point to  different forms of political corruption  things that are bad about ukraine and  then they say well so you criticize  vladimir putin for these things but you  pretend that because ukraine is our ally  so on and so forth that therefore  they're a morally good pro-democracy  government uh what have you  you know  i have never seen anyone audacious  enough  to present this argument about democracy  and myanmar or democracy in hong kong  right  you know back when there were elections  in myanmar they were flawed  before they had some democracy  now  they have none  some democracy  is worth fighting for if some democracy  is worth killing for some democracy is  worth dying for  and sorry democracy itself is a very  good example of this the way this man  who wrote to me is reasoning and  it is stupid it is shallow but it's not  trivial this is stupid and shallow but  really important so i'm taking the time  to deal with this that's why i'm making  a video called vegan mind tricks about  it this these are the kinds of  deceptions and justifications people  people live with  he is saying in justifying his own  decision to eat meat every day  this is someone who used to be vegan  claims he was vegan slash vegetarian  throughout his college years so we  assume that's about four years he got  the knack down he learned how to boil  beans or whatever he learned how to live  he learned how to cope with the  technical aspects of the diet  he is saying that he thinks he is  morally justified  in killing animals paying other people  to kill animals and eating meat every  day  because his definition of veganism  written out on a chalkboard  is impossible  in the real world  now  it would be very easy to write a  definition of democracy on a chalkboard  that does not exist anywhere in the real  world today  it is certainly possible to write a  definition of democracy on chalkboard  that is impossible for the people of  myanmar for the people of cambodia for  the people of hong kong right like you  could have a definition of democracy  that's not completely unattainable on  planet earth but it's just barely  attainable in switzerland and denmark  and when you really look at the reality  of life in myanmar you think  these people can't have democracy by  this standard for these reasons you know  could get into that why it would be  unattainable in a certain place at a  certain time  um to give you a a proposal there are  many ways to define democracy okay well  one one idea of democracy  is that everyone should have a say in  government everyone should be able to  participate everyone's opinion  matters everyone is consulted everyone  gets to vote for example in a referendum  and there are no distinctions of rich  and poor that your ability to  participate your ability to have a voice  a vote to influence the decision of  government is not bought and paid for  it's not because you're an aristocrat  it's not because you're wealthy right  that this is a kind of now this is not  the only definition of democracy but  that is one definition democracy i think  if you did a poll a very large  percentage of people would agree that  that's a basic working  definition of democracy you know  okay does that exist  in the real world anywhere today  how many countries are even attempting  to live up to that standard including  countries i have some respect for does  japan  live up to the standard of democracy you  know now again this we have many  centuries of reflections and  philosophizing about this in the  european tradition especially italy  frankly italy is really underrated for  some bizarre reason in  political science in the 21st century  it's really underrated and ignored i  mean i guess it was kind of overrated a  thousand years ago  you could say that you know it's gone  out of style um  but you know it is weird how little  attention is now paid any period of  italian history but you know part of the  paradox of democracy already discussed  in ancient greece and in ancient rome is  that it kind of professes egalitarianism  but it actually entails and practice a  kind of elitism  right  who who is influential in in the  athenian system of democracy in the  pinnex all right people like me  now again you could even say i'm  prejudiced in favor of athenian  democracy that reason a certain type of  daring  well-spoken man who will stand up and  risk his life to give voice to his  convictions because you were you were  risking your life to take a political uh  a position in in ancient athens  um you could also be beaten and flogged  and exiled there were different  punishments for you know if you took  this too lightly the democratic process  but you know it was a certain type of  character who had influence in athens  and there was a  almost all of the literature we have  from ancient athens is complaining about  this is a bad thing  i don't know i don't know if we have a  single extant document that says it was  a good thing they're constantly  complaining about these kind of  charismatic  figures who would stand up and in effect  rule  athens uh just by virtue of their wit  and daring i'm emphasizing daring here  for a reason if you get into more of the  literature or if you start reading  primary sources you will see what i mean  um and you know alcibiades so  hilariously alcabietis was not well  spoken he had a speech impediment it was  most sources something like a lisp but  he actually had a great deal of  difficulty speaking even privately  one-on-one and when he stood up on stage  she was not a gifted order or gifted  gifted  but he was daring  it was a really daring character and he  became one of the foremost most  influential powerful people in in the  politics of uh the greater  greco-roman world as it then existed his  adventures covered a lot of the map  um so daring  accounted for a great deal now i think  it's fair to say there are other  political systems  where daring is not rewarded or instead  it's a certain kind of dull conformist  person who stays quiet and is obedient  that's the kind of person who moves up  the ranks a certain kind of bureaucrat a  certain kind of yes man you know so  these are these are differences but i'm  just digressing on this all right  even if you have this chalkboard  approach to saying what is democracy  here's our definition of democracy  therefore it's impossible therefore it's  unattainable all right that doesn't mean  it's not worth fighting for that doesn't  mean it's not worth killing for it  doesn't mean it's not worth dying for  you know are you  kidding me you know  again i could go with many many examples  here  and this this argument which people  really believe in again it's shallow  it's stupid but it's incredibly  important that like you know the fact  that it may be impossible for you to  have a 100 vegan diet by this by this  definition therefore means there's no  point in even trying for someone else to  even try to have a 99 vegan diet or a 95  vegan diet people really live with these  delusions but then when you scale it up  that they feel the vegan movement is  hopeless that veganism is a political  cause and so on that's hopeless and  pointless and fruitless it is a bizarre  form of reasoning that people  really truly live with  um do you think  that a world entirely without slavery  is possible  do you think a world with zero  slavery in it is possible do you think a  world entirely  without racism  is possible do you think we'll ever have  a do you think we'll ever have a world  where people just don't hate each other  because of the color of their skin and  other ethic  you know like you know the fact that on  a chalkboard and you can come up with  with your definition what what like you  know again how exactly define a world  with zero  racism or zero  slavery you think there isn't an  unbelievable difference between what the  united states was in the year 1880 and  1980  think about those two days 1880 versus  19 people were still racist in the 1980s  there was kind of the golden age of  stand-up comedy on that stuff there were  so many standard comedians who get up  and the tension that existed within  american society you know from the the  legacy of slavery and racism was  tremendous then i think there was a lot  of comedy a lot of kind of hit hollywood  movies a lot of rap music responses okay  there is no comparison like you know  you think there's no difference between  electing  george w bush and electing al gore god  damn look back at the history of the  last century  whenever you're watching this video some  people may be watching this 10 years  from now or 50 years from now you cannot  imagine how the whole world  would be a different place today if al  gore had been president united states al  gore published books about ecology al  gore became vegan is he a good vegan are  they good books about ecology i think  what he has to ecology is kind of stupid  okay why don't you compare that to what  george w bush says about ecology george  w bush did not write books of money  compared to the actual policy and so on  george bush had in his hand like you  know the point is even if you think al  gore is a second-rate ecologist and a  third-rate vegan even you have a  critical view of him this difference  this is the way politics works right  these kinds of real world differences  really matter they're not just worth  voting for they're not worth debating  about they're not just worth having this  discussion right now on on youtube about  please hit thumbs up please share the  link please like and subscribe whatever  you know like i i do think this  discussion is really important for the  people who are going to have it right  this is actually worth killing people  for this is what civil wars  get fought over okay  the french revolution  very briefly for a few years destroyed  the power of the catholic church in  france  all right did they accomplish a hundred  percent atheism  did they replace a society that was  intensely religious i mean france  immediately before the french revolution  it was just as religious as italy or  whatever you want to say you know they  broke the power of the church yes with  violence you know are you shocked to  learn that the catholic church was not  going to give up its ownership of land  worth the equivalent of billions of  dollars today incredibly valuable land  incredibly valuable states the catholic  church was not just going to give up  political power and economic power let  alone you know religious power in  whatever nebulous sense the catholic  church was not just going to embrace  this new era of enlightenment people  defending the catholic church were  willing to fight and die for what they  believed in well the people who believed  in an atheist society were willing to  fight and die also and one side killed  more people than the other  all right and guys i have no illusions  about the brutality and violence of the  french revolution there was also money  involved okay they would go to a  property and they would declare so  there's both um  both a carrot and a stick here there's  some bait on the hook as well as the  immediate threat of mounts and they'd  say to these monks so you'd have an  estate a stereotypical estate in france  at this time there are monks who are  making wine or they might be making  brandy or some other hard liquor there's  monks who run a distillery and they have  a farm and the guys are all wearing the  robes and living in celibacy what have  you and the french the french revolution  show up and say hey look here's the deal  the dark ages are over  we are going to literally force you  to get married  you have to stop living in celibacy you  have to get a wife and we're going to do  a bunch of things to help you transition  into a better life in modern society and  for some of those monks you gotta  whether it's ten percent of the guys if  it was some of the monks  this doesn't sound so bad  you're gonna have a new life  in the new society  and guess what we're taking away this  land and we're dividing it into parcels  and we're basically auctioning off i  believe it was mostly rental contracts  it wasn't permanent sale but they would  they would the government raised a lot  of money by selling or renting or  leasing uh farmland that they took away  from the church so again you can see  there's an element of greed there's an  element of looting this is you know it's  now some percentage of the monks respond  to this by saying they were going to go  get a sword and a gun and go fight for  jesus fight to prolong the dark ages  right not not surprising some percentage  of them joined royalist groups and ultra  catholic groups  one of them was called the sons of jehu  as i recall  and that's been misremembered as the  sons of jesus but it wasn't the sons of  jehu and obscure there were but there  were ultra catholic and pro-monarchists  of terrorist groups who fought to go  back to the dark ages and so on and  again there are a lot of there are bad  intentions  on all sides  okay  you know if you are going to sit there  let's say you were alive at that time  you're going to cross your arms and say  well  we can never have a 100  atheist society  we can never have a society in which  nobody worships anything in which nobody  believes in anything you don't think  there's a difference  between having a society  in which  all education is provided by nuns  and a society in which none of it is  this is a serious issue at that time in  france was how do you provide sexual  education they had no ability to deal  with um sexually transmitted diseases i  mean you know stds they had no ability  to deal with this medically the main way  to prevent sexually transmitted diseases  was education right reliant they didn't  have condoms or  the condoms they had were not effective  in this way your ability to cope with  this you know venereal disease we're  going to say right it really led to your  ability to deal with unwanted pregnancy  like you can't do this and one of the  huge stumbling blocks was well guess  what the only people providing education  are nuns  and  most of them either don't know anything  about sex or they're uncomfortable  talking about sex or both or they're  part of this insane  uh you know  part of this insane cult that is very  sex negative attitudes great great  suggestion from uh william mcgeehan in  the audience william writes quote the  monks were happily mgtow and making  great  some percentage of the monks were  happily  were alcoholics living in celibacy  that's true but i think you can imagine  some of the monks  thought hey this is a you know this is  this is an opportunity you know some of  them didn't want to be there some of  them were from a poor family that had  too many sons and we're told look you  got to go join the monastery because we  have no better we have no better career  in life for you or whatever their  situation was sure some of them would  have embraced the opportunity and to get  married and have a more normal life and  some of them are willing to fight and  die for the future of an illusion for  the future of you know this this  idea of cat of christendom left over  from the dark ages to perpetuate that  forever okay  an atheist  was worth fighting for then  and it's worth fighting for  now  let's let's cast our minds back  to the year 2001. can you a lifetime ago  a lifetime cut tragically short a  lifetime ago 2001  an atheist  society  in afghanistan a truly  secular society  is it possible or impossible  i think it's still a tall order to talk  about an atheist society in vermont  to talk about an atheist society in  denmark we're still today in france  france is still a deeply religious  country how about italy right now in  2022 still catholic church has too much  power the pursuit  of an atheist society if you could  transform afghanistan so that it goes  from its current level of religiosity to  being as atheist as italy is today that  would be an amazing accomplishment right  relative differences differences of  degree  matter even more than differences of  kind  in politics we're never talking about a  hundred percent or zero percent racism  is never going to be zero percent tooth  decay is never gonna be zero percent  right poverty is never going to be zero  percent all right when the united states  made it illegal  for a property developer for a landlord  of any kind to distinguish between black  and white applicants for owning a home  renting an apartment that really  mattered okay were people still racist  yes  do you segregated neighborhoods still  exist in the united states america yes i  mean you can just look at a map of uh  the state of georgia or you know atlanta  or something you can say oh yeah white  people live here and black people live  here okay but  formerly in the recent past in america  there were legally overt forms of racism  that involved the banks and property  developers and landlords and very  literal ghettoization where black people  didn't have the option to live in this  neighborhood versus that neighborhood  now if you have a society where  everyone's free to live wherever they  want to but people are still racist and  live in separate neighborhoods it's  still a problem it's a different problem  right so  you know  yeah  look i'm doing this  because each and every one of you is  going to have somebody you love in your  life  somebody you care about enough to hold  their hand  and  talk through  this series of philosophical and  political realizations right i mean i've  always detested i made videos with this  about five years ago i've always  detested this habit of mind encouraged  by other youtubers of just saying that's  a logical fallacy and then shutting down  and dismissing the other person that's  an appeal to futility fallacy you know  that's that's a trolley car fallacy  that's this they memorize these  thought-terminating cliches all right no  deal with the fallacy that's also part  of politics we have to really deal with  fallacious reasoning you know people in  afghanistan are all cutting off part of  their penis they can go to heaven after  they die okay we have to deal with  there's no point  you're not going to win anything by just  saying that's fallacious or something  you have to really wade into  human nature you have to get dirty you  know you have to think the way they  think you have to use sympathy as an  analytical tool you have to understand  why they see it this way you have to  reason things through their way and then  hold their hand and help them reason  their way out of it and guys i don't  recommend doing it all the time i uh  i just said the beginning of this  statement i said  some of you like okay i think all of you  there's somebody you love  there's somebody you care about enough  to do what i'm doing in this video now  to really break it down and talk it  through with them and there's there's an  infinite number of people there are more  than six billion people where you don't  care enough to do that and you just have  to look at them and say  yup you don't get it you're never going  to get it and it's not my job  to  you know  lower myself to your level to reason it  through with you in your way right  um  [Music]  you know  the appeal to nature fallacy is real  it's a dominant mode of thinking in our  time the appeal to futility fallacy is  real it's a dominant mode of thinking  our time the belief that jesus christ  was a superpowered zombie who came back  from the dead  we who even can speak of this in terms  of a fantasy it's just ludicrous it's  just ridiculous  there's so many claims built into the  the new testament that are just wildly  historically improbable within patreon i  i drew attention to this recently  there's a passage that refers to  jewish pig farmers having thousands of  pigs on the banks of the sea of galilee  all right and the geography makes no  sense it's very obvious that whoever  wrote that passage of the new testament  was not really familiar with did not  understand the geography of israel  [Music]  jewish pig farmers  did jewish people in that period of time  farm pigs  on the sea of galilee and you can go  through the archaeological record by the  way that's in archaeology that's very  well preserved like if you have cattle  farms you can have 2 000 years of bone  fragments from all the cows that live  cows that were slaughtered there and  cows that were farmed there you know  that's true all over europe any  inhabited part of the world you can tell  what people were farming do you think do  you think there were thousands of pigs  being formed by jews and stupid like how  do you why do you think the text was  written this way there were all these  unbelievably obvious hints at what the  new testament really is all right like  this is way beyond a logical fallacy  right this is the wildly irrational  passionate reality of what human  reasoning is and if you love someone if  you care about someone as a unique human  being you are gonna hold their hand and  walk through the fire with them you're  gonna actually go through this [ __ ] with  them  because of the possibility  that they can be freed that they can  think their way out of  you know the the wildly irrational  beliefs they've thought their way into  and that they're now committed to  to justifying and making excuses okay  now look sorry the particular guy  writing into me i'll read you more of of  what he says in my my response to it you  know um  okay a good question from freda i'll  respond to that one second if any of you  have anything intelligent to say right  in if you have nothing intelligent to  say  [Laughter]  it's up to you to judge  decide if you have something intelligent  enough for me to interrupt what i'm  saying or uh or respond to that way okay  look  i do not know why this guy became vegan  during his university years right but  i'm gonna say this he probably had good  reasons  right like i don't think if he was vegan  for four years  i don't think it's for no reason all  right he said he had a job at whole  foods  and during those years he was vegan  whether his reasons were ethical  environmental  all right  and yet this  unbelievably trivial excuse he's giving  now is a good enough reason for him to  eat meat  right for him to kill  and eat the bodies of animals every day  you know again relying on the idea of  the possible and the impossible the  thinkable and the and the unthinkable  right  now you know okay we can sit here and  harshly condemn his character and by all  means go right ahead you and you you may  be in that situation with your boss at  work you know there may just be people  you know in your life you may know  ex-vegans and so many they have the oh  well i was i had acne you know like they  stopped being being because they had  acne  so as if nobody who eats meat gets acne  it's just ridiculous but that was that's  who they are you know like  if you knew someone who literally owned  slaves  and you offered you the excuse  that a world with zero slavery is  unattainable and a 100 emancipated world  is unattainable therefore they're just  going to go on owning and exploiting  slaves they're gonna literally have  people in chains and whip them every day  pardon me on that that excuse that  chalkboard excuse  this doesn't tell me anything about  slavery it doesn't tell me anything  about politics tell us tell something  about you  right tell me something about this  person and you can never dismiss that  just mention maybe you guys encounter  this attitude maybe you don't  but  i think one of  the most  potent and influential forms of  stupidity  in our time  is the attempt to  disassociate politics  from the unique individual and to  instead think in terms of systems  abstractions on a chalkboard but also  social systems on a grand scale i see so  much  pessimism  about transforming individual people  tied to  a reckless  revolutionary optimism about changing  the system  right you know there are reasons for  that that i think are ultimately rooted  in our system of education it's how  people are taught in school maybe to  some extent also how their how they're  taught in religion people say again and  again that you can't transform  individual people  but you can  change the system okay  and they're wrong  all right the system  consists of  people  it consists of relationships  between people it consists of rules  and traditions  that are transferred between  people  the constitution  of the united states of america  is like a napkin  at a bar  you were supposed to meet your friend  there you sat down to have a drink  and there's an empty glass of beer with  a note written down on it from your  friend saying you had to go away for  five minutes  and then  you sit there and find out  your friend just died in a traffic  accident and is not coming back  okay  a constitution  a written law  is nothing more than a jotted down note  communicating something from one human  being to  another it's a thought it's a sentiment  it's a tradition  all right yes  and you don't get to talk back  to that person you don't get to change  their mind you just get to choose  whether you're going to take this napkin  the last thing ever written down by your  friend they're gonna meet you at the bar  and whether you're gonna worship it  you're gonna fetishize it you can put it  in a frame and hang it on your wall and  make a big deal of it carry it around  forever  you know or if you're going to crumple  it up and throw it away and start  with a new napkin  okay  melissa and i both read recently a court  decision that was frankly a brilliant  court decision in the united states it  was just highly intelligent highly  inventive  um i think i read it out loud to you  look i read it and the most interesting  parts i read out loud to melissa  and it was the high court decision in  the united states  about pacman the video game  and this judge  was trying to interpret  legal precedent  about  theater  about the performance of a play in the  theater  and applying it to what was then the  brand new technology  of video games so he was looking at  legal precedents and decisions by courts  before where one playwright sues another  playwright saying hey you ripped off my  story like they came up with a detective  story let's just say it's a detective  story where it turns out the butler did  it like that's the plot twist you know  and say well you you didn't give me any  money you didn't pay me you you wrote  your own script and even though it's  different in some ways it's  fundamentally my plot that you you  ripped off my idea for the story he had  to interpret  court precedents about the theater and  apply them to pac-man  the video game and decide the limits at  what point is a video game so similar to  pac-man that you can win a court case on  the basis of that similarity right  because  and it was brilliant it was highly  erudite highly intelligent like  well-intentioned courts like i enjoyed i  was really impressed i'm not it was not  stupid it was not  trivial all right but that's what the  law is  that's that's the system  you know like  the system you're talking about they are  just  decisions made by particular people at  one point in time to cope with one  short-term crisis  after another you know the unit the  constitution united states of america  was a set of decisions  completely  intended to solve a short-term crisis  the the single most of the same crisis  was a currency crisis by the way um i've  written a whole book about it but if you  understand what was really going on and  what they were trying to solve hmm why  doesn't it say one word about policing  or police brutality the american  constitution why doesn't it say one word  about marriage why doesn't it say one  word about privacy why does this say  anything about abortion why doesn't it  say anything about relations between  black people and white people which you  know later a civil war was fought over  there are all these issues of obvious  overwhelming importance why doesn't it  define or discuss what it means by  property you know or liberty or anything  else there are these huge gaps in what  you know in a very basic sense a  constitution ought to do or needs to why  does it say so little about the  relationship between religion and  government you know it does say  something it doesn't say nothing at all  but sort of judicious in its  silence why does it say so little even  about the relationship between the  federal government and the states the 13  colonies as they then were  and then  judges  and legislators you know members of  congress and so on they're left to piece  together these little scraps information  these little napkins  left behind at the bar from our great  deceased ancestors and try to make a  coherent picture and apply it to the  problems of today you know the authors  of the constitution  did they ever  ever consider the ethics  of extraordinary rendition  of arresting a teenager in afghanistan  on the suspicion that they're somehow  connected to terrorism  transporting them to germany  and then keeping them in a prison  in cuba in guantanamo bay for years  possibly for decades  you want to have a court case where you  sit there with these little napkins  these little notes these decisions made  about irrelevant things and some of  those decisions are stupid and some of  them are evil like some of them are  really  take a look at uh high court precedence  on slavery in the united states of  america many of the judges as individual  people were unspeakably evil people i  really mean that you know they're not  they're not all like that pac-man  decision they're not all erudite people  you can kind of appreciate how about  genocide against the indigenous people  and the decisions about that you get  into some real evil just in the court  precedence and how these things are  interpreted and applied oh another one  is eugenics eugenics in the united  states of america  though you give me nightmares reading  those really it'll give you nightmares  those those core presidents you know  so  and frankly eugenics in europe goes back  to plato nation greece and ancient  greece there's a lot of discussions you  have ancient greece and sparta they  could have they could have dealt with  eugenics in writing the american  constitution wasn't a new idea you know  and then the role of government and the  parents and the trump  could have dealt with all these things  you know  none of it's there but you're talking  about people interpreting these utterly  irrelevant  scraps of information decisions you know  and even when they're brilliant they're  spurious and often enough they're stupid  or evil or combination of the two all  right  um  i just can't believe  that i'm a member of a generation  that believes that it's easier to change  the system  than it is to change  individual people  people can change  once you change enough people  they will change the system  transforming people individually in  hundreds or in thousands that is what's  possible that's the change we can make  here and now all right systemic change  in the absence of violence  on an unspeakable scale no offense but  for people in the audience today for you  it is probably an unimaginable scale in  the absence of violence and coercion  of a nature you can't even imagine  right changing the system  is utterly impossible  compared to changing individual people  dozens of people hundreds of people  thousands of people i could use tons of  examples here but one of them is  afghanistan  okay you want to write a new  constitution for afghanistan  it could be the same as the one from the  french revolution declare the rights of  man declare that you know of a secular  society whatever you want okay you've  got to change people  and it's going to it may start with a  dozen it may start with 100 may start  with a thousand right  like obviously in a case like  afghanistan you have this extreme  challenge in the transition to a secular  society even if you just take uh you  know the laws that france has today you  could you could just translate the  entire legal code of france uh and then  impose it on afghanistan the american  army could have done that what do you  think the results would be you know this  is a problem for france too they would  continue to have a taliban country right  where taliban values and taliban  religious ideas were simply being  exercised in a french-style court of law  with french-style police so on and so  forth you know guarding it no people the  human element is what you can change  right you change the people and then  people change the system now again with  the significant  caveat  that if you want systemic change without  changing the people first  that involves violence  i've already described to you here the  violence of the french revolution in  some detail with some particular example  of the the type of violence involved  okay all right  if you wanted to  immediately and overnight  eliminate circumcision  in afghanistan so that no more boys and  no more girls were being circumcised  afterward imagine the type of violence  imagine the coercion just for that one  issue that one aspect  of the muslim faith right to to enforce  that and do it immediately not over  decades or centuries of cultural  transformation and personal  transformation okay you can you can't do  it but like i'm really saying to you i  i've studied some incredibly dark  chapters of history i haven't been  involved in that kind of balance myself  but i can imagine the type of violence  we're talking about here if if you do  the reading or you get out and have the  kind of experience you may start to  imagine it also all right but coercive  cultural transformation changing the  system first and not individual people  that's that's what you're talking about  right  and um look  i've written a whole book about this  the other question we have to get into  profoundly  is the extent to which that  transformation will always be phony will  always be pointless will always be  counterproductive if it is merely  coerced  right now religion is easier to  visualize this with than veganism but  you know you have to do both the purpose  of this video all right  if you  convert someone to islam through brute  force through the sword  you know  and they are only as muslim as they have  to be as a result of that coercion right  you have a thoroughly phony  nominal convert to islam who doesn't  believe in the religion who doesn't  respect the koran doesn't pray  or only prays in a public forum where  he's forced to go through the motions  due to this kind of courage right and  that that exists  it exists today historically when islam  was an empire rapidly expanding a huge  percentage of people had just been  conquered by a muslim army they'd  understand okay just to survive they  have to convert minimally and anomaly  right well you can have the same with  atheism right you can have a society  where people are nominally atheist where  for example a communist dictatorship is  forcing them to pretend to be atheists  right i know that's going to sound  absurd to you guys but that happened  with communists in china forcing people  to eat meat  there were many people in china who were  vegetarian  it's a traditional aspect of many  religions in china frankly it's not  especially buddhist  buddhism taoism confucianism in general  all the chinese folklore traditions  regarded vegetarianism positively this  may sound ridiculous to you but chinese  communism with tremendous violence  tried to force people to be secular  force people to be atheist and that  included forcing people who had been  vegetarian to eat meat you know and i  think you can imagine like  you might be someone is insincerely  compelled to be vegan and they're just  barely as big as possible and it's a  historical reality the jet people were  forced to eat meat and they were maybe  maybe only eating as much meat as  possible so again i've written a whole  book about this and it's only uh 100  pages long so  i have two books coming up my other book  is longer and deeper and  i think more emotionally exhausting  most i find my books emotionally  exhausting other people find them uh  entertaining and uplifting which is a  good sign i get a lot of positive  feedback but for anyway i find this i  find this stuff somewhat emotionally  exhausting to deal with  uh maybe that's why i write the books  and don't and don't read them but other  people seem to find it positively  motivating but i have one book called  veganism future of an illusion only 100  pages and then this much longer book no  more manifestos they both they both deal  with this  but i'm just saying on the level of  one-to-one relationships just you and  one person you love in your life one  person you respect one person you care  about and on the larger scale of a  society of  of millions you know i mean okay  let's bring this all the way down let's  make this really tangible and easy to  imagine  uh i'm ethnically jewish  in case you hadn't guessed i'm an  atheist i'm a nihilistic atheist  i have met  some orthodox jewish women who were very  attractive i have  i have  and some of those women found me  very attractive  what if i had been seduced by one of  these women  and she says to me that she wants to  proceed with a relationship she wants to  get married  but  i'm going to have to be jewish enough  to make the marriage work i'm gonna have  to be jewish enough  to get along with her parents and  grandparents let's say aunts and uncles  to participate in certain ceremonies  maybe to memorize and recite certain  phrases in hebrew you know like she  knows genetically i have enough jewish  ancestry to make it work but i'm gonna  have to adopt  the religion  conversely  what if one of these women falls in love  with me i say look  you're going to have to be atheist  enough  you're going to have to be nihilist  enough to suit me  you're going to have to be vegan enough  to sue me  right and maybe it's  both right maybe of a marriage or each  it's not as simple as saying one  party imposes  his will on the other or one woman  imposes her will  on the man  maybe each of us is influencing the  other in a complex  tug of war  right maybe you get into a marriage  where simultaneously  you are forcing the person to have  secular atheist nihilistic attitudes  maybe you're forcing them to be vegan  but maybe reciprocally they're forcing  you to participate in religious  ceremonies or something right okay like  now i've said about a lot of things but  i see your i see your comments coming in  that's great if you want to comment more  please do if a couple more people hit  the thumbs up button that'll be great  have as many thumbs up as we have people  in the audience  um  okay i've said in this video repeatedly  that having an atheist world is worth  fighting for and worth dying for was  worth it during the french revolution  still worth it today i've said it about  many things like look a world without  slavery is worth fighting for and worth  dying for and don't tell me it's  impossible like see it's kind of  irrelevant to say you could never have a  100 emancipated world you can never have  a world with zero slavery you never rule  with zero religion you can have a world  that's 100 enlightened or 100 rational  well guess what 50  just fifty percent democracy is worth  fighting for them  for we were looking up the ratings uh  yesterday of the day before yesterday uh  there's this website that ranks how  democratic different countries are and  it's a bit ridiculous but some of them  when you're at the low end the  difference between nine percent  democracy and 18 democracy that's worth  fighting a dive board the difference  between 18 democracy and 50 democracy  look at real world examples obviously  you can calibrate this or measure this  in different ways the assignation of  numbers is a bit arbitrary but  nevertheless oh yeah uh yeah guys the  difference between living in thailand  and living in saudi arabia  is worth fighting for with dying for  okay so you let me say that but  all right  is it worth  fighting for someone to be  an atheist  if it's going to be utterly  phony  and coercive right  like if i know my own wife like she's  just in love with me  and she's pretending to be atheist and  pretending to be secular  just just to be atheist enough to make  this marriage work  right  vice versa she loves me let's say my i  married someone who's an orthodox jew  and she knows in my heart i'm an atheist  and i'm just going through the motions  i'm just doing these ceremonies to  satisfy her and her parents and  grandparents i'm just jewish enough i'm  just tolerating this me because she's  really beautiful maybe because she's the  sex is really good something really  shallow like this hey let's add maybe  she's rich let's say she's paying my  rent there you go let's add some more  let's add some more variables to the  matter maybe i'm financially dependent  on her there you go now now you've got  now you've got a real tug of war right  and you've got some stereo okay  so it's one thing to say this is worth  fighting for this is worth arguing for  this is worth having this live stream  discussion for when it's something  sincere and real right what about when  it's utterly phony what about when it's  insincere what about when it's coercive  in nature and we all have to deal with  that right  some of us adopt beliefs and things just  because of our our work or place of  employment i remember talking to one guy  who had become a professor at a  christian university in japan  and i i talked with them and i said oh  wow okay i'm surprised you that and i  was i was asking i said look i assume  it's only as christian as the boy scouts  or something like it's not too christian  and i appreciate he took the time to  write back to me and really describe how  his life was made horrible every day  because he was a professor at a  university  he was an atheist and they held prayer  meetings every day and they drew you  know stephanie they were supposed to  hold hands and stand in a circle and  close their eyes and pray and they  prayed for their students there was all  this religious  content built into what was going on at  the university you know  and um  yeah i'm going to say in a subtle way it  was horrifying and coercive for him to  deal with every day and anyway in ways  you may or may not have examined all of  us are subject to coercion in these ways  okay so guys melissa if you want to say  something melissa is also aaron as a  member of the audience i'm not going to  take a minute to to respond to what's  the audience  you don't think i've left anything  unsaid  [Laughter]  yeah this is a bit of a paint roller  approach this issue covering all the uh  covering all the corners of the issue  okay so so comment i understand um i  understand your your uh concern or  objection here so random dude in the  audience is defending the importance of  the american constitution so random dude  you may really enjoy reading both of my  books both future of an illusion and  no more manifestos no more manifesto  deals with this much more directly and  explicitly okay now you know  i have to ask you  to what extent you attribute  the positive aspects of american culture  the positive aspects of america  politically  to this piece of paper  as opposed to  attributing it to people themselves  there is certainly  a religion in the united states of  america  that proceeds from the assumption  that people are bad  the human nature is bad and everything  good about the united states of america  is thanks to this written constitution a  written law  uh constraining  and holding back the evils of human  nature so this is human nature  being like a lion on a choke chain a  lion that has a chain going around its  neck  and without this constitution  the people the united states of america  would just be unspeakably barbaric or  evil or terrible now that  theory  is so obviously flagrantly wrong  that nobody really says it out loud but  again i'm not saying this to ridicule  you  but this is an implicit part of your own  argument of of what you've said to me  here you seem to think the american  people are are terrible people and i'm  at the opposite extreme on that i think  what's right with the united states of  america is because of its people  it's because of its culture and and so  on and people just as as individual  people it's the it's the product of a  certain historical process  created this culture  uh i do not think that the american  people are bad but their constitution is  good my argument is very much the  opposite that america is good despite  its constitution and not because of it  now correctly understood again you can  read my books and you might you might  enjoy it more than you think you do what  i'm saying is profoundly flattering  about americans really you should be  flattered i'm saying there are really  good things about america but what's  good about you is not your court system  it's not your police system  it's not your corpus  of written law  you know that's not what's good about  america and if you really just stop and  reflect on it do you feel proud  of your court system do you feel proud  of your system of lawyers how do you  feel about lawyers how do you feel about  the people who charge such high fees who  make so much money and you bankrupt  people by taking your constitution and  putting it into practice how do you feel  about the legal system and many people  will respond to this you know i don't  know this was saying no no no  somehow the constitution is this morally  perfect thing that exists above that  hovers above  the reality of the legal system in  practice no it's not it's one cog it's  one  wheel it's one part of the you know  mechanism of this uh  wind-up toy  of you know the american legal system no  you know the constitution you know this  is this is ridiculous you know what's  wrong with policing in america what's  wrong with courts what's wrong with the  legal system is  what's wrong with the constitution and  vice versa you know um the constitution  is a linchpin aspect of a terrible legal  system that most americans are ashamed  of  now look i'll just say so you know in  many ways i'm really profoundly  pro-american  i think viewers in my channel actually  are somewhat astonished at that  i can give you a really quick contrast  and it's going to be easier for you to  visualize this  because you don't you're not connected  i'm sorry but it's obvious this person  is american and they're some kind of  american nationalist you know um  you know  uh  what is good  about  thailand  do you respect the constitution of  thailand do you respect the legal system  the courts the police  is that what's good about thailand or is  it that what's good about thailand is  really good  despite the legal system despite their  political problems frankly you know and  that's a country that has rewritten its  constitution quite recently if you  respect thailand as it exists today you  respect the thai people that's really  what your respect is for and you see the  goodness of the thai people shining  through despite their legal system  that's how i feel about america and just  another one that's a little bit less  exotic but again you'll have  detachment what's good about france  have you ever read the constitution of  france again i encourage you read the  constitution of thailand read the  constitution of france read the  constitution of brazil read the  constitution of russia today vladimir  putin's russia read the constitution  it's a big gap between what the  constitution says and the reality of  life in vladimir putin's russia god read  the constitution of communist china  it'll blow your mind the constitution of  communist china says they have elections  all the time  they have no elections you know there  can be a big gap in what the  constitution is on paper really okay  what is good about  france now i could list off all the  things i like about france there are  things i really positively appreciate  about france the french are ashamed  of their court system they're ashamed of  their lawyers as are americans they feel  they have a terrible court system  terrible lawyers and it really was  exposed during the giles jean period and  the george floyd period they're also  ashamed of their police they have  tremendous problems with police  brutality you know it's somewhat  different than america's situation  you want to speak but yeah but i just  say that's a very fundamentally  different thing and you know i know  you've stumbled into this it's something  my own thoughts are very much gathered  on because i've written two different  books that deal with it especially no  more manifesto skills this great depth  and great passion  she's she's wearing the t-shirt you can  buy the t-shirt yourselves  yeah  go on yeah so my question concerns this  issue of coercion versus you know  genuinely doing something because you've  thought thought it through and uh  decided that this is the right thing to  do  so i know so go on yeah okay  i know of a certain uh little girl  who didn't want to brush her teeth  yeah  so  yeah i think uh many people can relate  to this uh on a family scale uh maybe  you can even remember yourself when you  didn't want to brush your hair when you  didn't want to brush your teeth and um  you know your parent had to coerce you  to do that because they knew better they  knew that if you didn't brush your teeth  then you might get cavities and uh you  know tooth decay is a real problem uh  so on this scale i think i think we can  all recognize that there is just a  certain time  and level of understanding that people  have to go through before they can  really understand  why you're doing what you're doing  why are you forcing them to do something  that they don't want to do  right so so i want to jump in i'm sure  you have more okay but look i want to  answer this immediately  so when i was much younger when i was  like 21 or something i was an optimist  of a human nature because i thought okay  when we start off we're all stupid  teenagers  but sooner or later when life gets on  like once we're all in our 40s or 50s  we've all like some of us sooner than  others we've all attained a certain  level of intellectual sophistication  political sophistication philosophical  sophistication ethical association  because you know i was aware when i was  a teenager and when i was say 21 years  old  i was aware that there was this gap  between myself and basically everyone  else my own age i can just pause  being real with you  it wasn't almost everyone else it was  every other person i'd ever met who was  my own age was far less intellectually  sophisticated than i was that's luck  partly right like i'm not saying i was  the most brilliant person in the world  but let me tell you i mean when you i  was enrolled in political science at the  university of toronto  most of my professors really most  nervous who are much older than me they  were way less intellectually  sophisticated than i was and knew less  about politics and less about philosophy  i dealt with that a lot it was  horrifying to me i didn't feel happy  about it i didn't wasn't on an ego trip  it was totally bewildering  but my optimism at that time was okay i  look around at these other people who  are 18 19 20 21  like okay there's a gap between us today  i'm more advanced than you  but sooner or later you're going to  catch up with me and then we're all  going to be let's say 50 years old and  we're all going to be sophisticated and  ready to take on you know the difficult  questions over time that was my hope not  that the number 50 wasn't my but i  like i really felt i really felt that i  was equal to these people  and that we would become more equal  with time all right  the tragedy of my middle-aged life is  really accepting  that no  we were unequal then  and we have become  more and more unequal  over time like when i was 21  i was more advanced because i had five  years  thinking and worrying about  politics philosophy ethics  and all kinds of other substantive  things worrying about art i'm worried  about you know how to be a writer how to  be an artist how to be a playwright how  to be a comedian there were other things  that i'd put my mind into but anyway  just in general we can just say politics  intellectual development ethical  development emotionally  so there was this inequality when i was  21  but rather than that inequality  shrinking with time everyone catching up  and becoming more equal right what i've  seen instead is people becoming more and  more unequal  over time that the gap  when we only have five years of  adulthood behind us there's a certain  gap and now we have 10 years now we have  15 years now we have 20 years and the  gap is becoming wider and wider right i  mean you know i know this is a small  example but it's a very telling one  i only had a certain amount of free time  when i was taking care of my newborn  daughter she was a baby and it was i  literally spent a lot of time  rocking just that action really you  spend a lot of time doing it you know  but you would have bits and pieces of  free time every so often the baby takes  a nap sometimes totally unexpectedly by  the way  all of a sudden the baby's asleep and  maybe you have 15 minutes maybe you have  half an hour to read something you know  now i know i knew other fathers like you  met other guys you know what it is  you're going to the hospitals whatever  whatever context you meet other parents  with kids the same age when you're a  parent generally you know and you know i  also talked to guys who  had been parents in the past their kids  were now growing up  you know there are other guys who when  they get those 15 minutes  they're running over the tv to press  play  and watch the football game watch the  baseball game like that's what they're  doing with their time and again it was  very memorable to me that what i was  doing i was reading thucydides i was  reading herodotus i was reading the  ancient great pardon me ancient greek  works on  uh politics and political philosophy and  i was really i was still i was still  asking myself hard questions  that stereo stereotypically people  associate with your with your teenage  years right  okay so long answer to your question but  this is from me answering your question  all right  the problem with this mode of thinking  you know like i totally get it it's the  puzzle of  i know better than you  therefore i have to ask you to brush  your teeth right even if you don't  understand why you have to brush teeth  because i know what's best  and you don't okay the problem is when  you let yourself get into this way of  thinking in politics all right i look at  alexandria ocasio-cortez i know most  people regard her as a brilliant person  and i see someone who's so stupid and so  ignorant that they shouldn't even have  the right to vote  like  my gap with aoc  like i like sure if you let yourself  think this way where it's like i get to  decide who brushes their teeth  you know who who does and doesn't have  to be right but this is my point is  politically  like i totally understand both sides of  it you know politically you can take  rights away from some people or even the  vast majority of people and say look  you're not at a level of education  sophistication enough to make this  decision we have to make this decision  for you right  okay so as soon as you typically yeah it  has been shown if you brush your teeth  yes it leads to less fewer cavities and  that this is an important healthy thing  to do  so it's very obvious that i'm doing the  right thing when i am basically forcing  isil's daughter to brush his teeth right  her teeth  you said yeah yeah sorry  yes forcing isil's daughter to brush her  teeth uh that right that and i can hold  her hand because i i love her i'm not  doing it in a mean way you know saying  look i'm brushing my teeth let's brush  our teeth together i even brushed her  teeth for her yes you know so i'm just  saying like that is very clear that it's  very obvious but  for other people it is not obvious that  veganism is the right thing to do  obviously because it's only such a small  number salt small percentage of the  population so in effect you're saying  okay so i totally disagree with you  because this is the problem sorry i'm  just saying guys again this is something  it's like it's shallow but it's really  important so we just went through this  uh globally  in the united states america globally  okay  the people  who refused to use vaccines within the  last two years and this that also that  phenomena has gone up for decades like  already 20 years ago 40 years ago there  were people who were super  morally opposed to vaccines  were they predominantly young were they  predominantly teenagers like what i saw  i saw a lot of middle-aged people a lot  of elderly people were they  you know predominantly  but my point is it's very easy to say  that it's scientifically self-evident  that you should brush your teeth  but it's a fact but i recognize there  are still adults who don't right no no  and they're committed there are people  who believe fluoride is a yeah they have  conspiracy right yeah they do uh you  know  you know there are people i mean with  the vaccine thing that played out in  dramatic fashion people can committed to  this and some of them are highly  educated i've seen people with phds i've  seen some of them are highly educated a  lot of them are elderly or middle-aged  they're not just teenagers they're not  just ignorant but like this is my point  to me this is the same as alexander  ocasio-cortez like to me she's still a  baby she's still a little kid mentally  aoc where someone like me can decide you  gotta brush your teeth and her opinion  doesn't like that's how i that's how i  feel about it but like politically what  you're committing to with democracy  is precisely the openness to let those  people come into the panics let those  people come into the parliament let them  have a have a voice no matter how stupid  and misinformed  no matter how anti-scientific or  genuinely crazy that's the that's the  gambit you're taking in politics in in  in democracy yeah and i would just say  you know part of the tragedy of  non-democratic systems of government  people might think that they're avoiding  that but it's just as terrifying with  aristocracy or we openly religious that  you end up with a sample so you know i  know i'm not i know i'm not driving at  the same point as you but that's why i  think it's so important say well this is  this is the necessary implication of  that right yeah i mean maybe it's a  totally different point but i i do also  have an awareness of just how much was  discussed in ancient athens now and  realizing that many of these issues were  already discussed yes um including even  vegetarianism but it's even more  upsetting to think that we're still at  this  stage and you know when you talk about  living in a place like afghanistan uh  you know at what point will they be  ready to see the light that circumcision  is wrong you know right that's  what point is just going to be that we  don't need to force them to do this  right they will just see that this is  inherently the right thing to do is to  stop circumcising infants you know like  this is  great  but but at the current level of  education in the united states and  england we could we could include many  countries in europe a huge percentage of  people get circumcised in both the  united states america and england i  believe australia too i don't know i  could look up maybe i'm wrong maybe  australia is lower but you know my point  is you can't say  that if the level of education in  afghanistan were raised to be equal to  the united states and england that the  problem would disappear right because  circumcision as a problem is still  dominant in the united states and in  england that's correct yes yeah and you  know i mean again i'm very explicit the  book philosophizes about this at some  length democracy involves coercion  democracy absolutely involves you have a  meeting you have a vote you have a  referendum you have whatever kind of  debate and then once you make this  decision the implications are that it's  enforced on other people and you know  sorry to give a really good example you  know sewage  if you allow sewage to mix with drinking  water people will die of quite a long  list of diseases right  a lot it's not instinctual people do not  have a natural sense that they shouldn't  pollute their own drinking water it's  happened throughout history even within  canada uh the statistic i remember um in  the four years before world war one in  canada  more people died because of sewage being  in the drinking water the i.e those  diseases diseases that are communicated  away then died in combat in world war  one in the four years falling after  that's from memory but  obviously i read that in a book many  years ago you know um so you know it's  one thing to say look this is a simple  scientific fact and sometimes it is you  know something don't don't eat your own  poo don't drink your own poop yeah it  seems like a really scientific fact  simple scientific effect but the  political reality of that the type of  coercion that  ensues as you know  you know it'll mean going on to people's  farms and going into people's property  the government enforcing sewage  regulations what happens you know what  we're then mostly outhouses you know  that that kind of thing and the  implications for farming you know cattle  farming and pig farming those things  over the the the long arm of the law  reaching down into people's personal  lives and really using coercion to end  this kind of poisoning it's kind of  self-poisoning of humanity politically  like that sounds like a simple example  but politically it's really complex but  this is the point i put you isn't it  marvelous  if you can say to people we debated this  at the pinnex  we debated this democratically you had  your chance to vote for it and guess  what  65 percent of people voted like after we  discussed it after everyone learned  about this or learned about what percent  65 of people said we have to get rid of  this sewage problem so [ __ ] you as  opposed to will the queen decide  yeah no that's it ultimately ultimately  there's there's coercion involved right  ultimately ultimately yeah but as  opposed to saying well the queen decided  this right so if you don't understand it  you know yeah i will just say a good  example that we recently looked into was  the debate about abortion in ireland yes  that this was a referendum a national  referendum the idea that everybody  was able to vote on this referendum i  mean right not everybody did right but  theoretically yes everybody in ireland  could uh vote on this and they decided  that abortion should be illegal yes you  know this is this is an example of it's  a very positive example and in case you  don't know ireland is still catholic as  hell okay  yes yes um  exactly so despite the fact that they're  a catholic society right  enough people yes  and they decided on this thing that goes  against catholicism right you know  because they're  able to think it through enough they've  they've progressed past this certain  point right  um  yeah well i just want to say something  to take something implicit and make it  explicit right  the people make the laws  the laws do not make the people  and with that very simple example the  people of ireland stood up and voted in  a referendum so now abortion is legal  rather than illegal okay it's the people  making laws this is no there's more than  one way to define democracy this is a  crucial aspect of just republicanism  generally whether or not it's democracy  this is part of the idea of the republic  and part of the problem with americans  which again i address in this book is  that they have it the wrong way around  they think  the laws create the people the  constitution creates the people creates  the goodness of the american people and  it doesn't you know yeah oh no i agree  that's a that's a good example where  people can look back and say okay no in  2018 we decided you know people might  still protest right people are still  gonna hold signs up you know down at  city hall but for the next 50 years it's  probably something we've made this  decision sure and if you want to put it  into a vote again ten years from now we  can more like i think more like 50 years  now i don't think i don't think it'll be  that recent that that soon that you'll  have another vote yes but yeah but for  the time being this is what the  democracy decides we're going to live  with right and look i mean again no one  looks back on this as a lost um  i don't know as a higher level of  civilization than we've lost both athens  and sparta the people directly voted  before going to war  when was the last time the american  people voted on whether they wanted to  go to war or not either for the start of  a war or the universe it has never  happened once never once in the united  states america was there a referendum or  any kind of direct vote on a war whether  a war should start or stop so in this  sense i mean this is just one of many  criteria both athens and sparta were  more  democratic than the united states  america and by the way reading salis  salas is not that well-known a name to  s-a-l-l-u-s-t if you search themselves  to my channel  salus describes the way war was voted on  in rome  rome was i feel that rome was to  simplify rome was less democratic than  than athens but still they had a  significant amount of democracy and you  actually get a sense of how  the different bodies the different  democrat semi-democratic bodies jockeyed  for position and contest and decided  whether or not they're going to war go  on  so i i wonder if this you know this idea  of not being able to vote to go to war  can kind of uh relate to this other idea  that i was thinking of while i was  listening to  uh so  um  that is correct uh  and you read about uh  mcnamara's uh yes basically that the  people who um  were  they shouldn't have been serving in the  army because they were actually too um  their iq was too low they shouldn't have  been able to serve in the army uh this  was during the vietnam war um  so they did not have the ability to vote  on whether or not they would actually go  to war yet they were granted to go into  the war and many of them you know  had i'm sure terrible experiences in the  army because  if they were really not intelligent to  understand like how to shoot a gun uh  how to tie their shoelaces you know yeah  that this is this is a real uh  considerable problem  and you know it got me thinking earlier  when you were talking about how uh  it's not impossible to play the piano  and you  want to sit down and  like if you really love somebody you can  sit down with them and say look it's not  impossible for you one million people  can learn to play the piano per year you  can too right um so maybe not 100 of the  population will be able to learn piano  um but  i think you said like 100 of the  population could they could but they  won't right  100 of people could be vegan and they  won't right yes  um yeah but it is just kind of shocking  when you think about how many people  really can't understand these things you  are not ready to understand i agree yes  at a certain point maybe uh two years  old you're too young  i agree but i'm being honest when i say  i believe aoc  can't do it alexandria crystal court is  i literally believe she is not  intellectually capable not emotionally  capable not ethically capable of  participating democracy that's my  opinion like like obviously i think  everyone admits there's some point at  which you're too mentally disabled to  participate in democracy like some some  people are so mentally still they can't  talk they can't read like you know they  really you know that's that's how severe  they're just i get it but i'm saying to  you if i'm really being honest  i perceive someone like alexander kaiser  cortez who's celebrated in this way i  look at her and i think you cannot  participate in democracy and sorry i i  don't really know these people very well  but if you think of any kind of pop  culture figure um  logan paul  you know is logan paul too stupid too  immature because it's not just raw  intelligence right like i mean i'm  saying you could take any johnny depp  can you like seriously can johnny depp  go to the pinex can johnny depp  participate in direct democracy or  parliamentary dogs like johnny depp most  people regarded him as highly  intelligent and shrewd and sophisticated  he you know he had a certain ambiance of  being a sophisticated man until a few  months ago or something and now all this  testimony has come about the reality of  his private life and how he lives  you know like from my perspective my  point is not that johnny depp is  [ __ ]  uh you know that that is not my point  whether or not it's true i mean i don't  know if if he can get a diagnosis for  having limited seriously for a limited  cognitive capacity because it turns out  he's an amazingly stupid man  but you know  i'm just being honest with you like in  terms of what does it take  to do what for me is now effortless like  playing the piano you work at it hard  enough for long enough it becomes  effortless well i wasn't born this way  decades of hard work have made it  effortless for me to to do what i'm  doing right now what i've done in over a  thousand youtube videos and guys i can  stand up in parliament and do this and i  can stand in front of in front of a  corporate board of directors and do this  like i you know  and it's not just about talking it's  about reasoning and all these other  things go into it you know okay so it's  become effortless for me but yeah i'm  saying how many people can  can do this on my level and look sorry  george w bush is one of the most  horrifying of all i mean you get someone  so stupid in a position of power i mean  aoc is stup who's stupid or george w  bush or or alexander or casual cortez  you know it's terrifying that you've had  people so stupid in positions of such  tremendous power yeah right and i i  would be accepting of people like george  bush and  you know you made this comparison johnny  depp or logan paul if they were able to  vote in a referendum like in ireland  that you know decided uh whether or not  abortion should be legal yes but you  know you're talking about actually  leading the nation or leading uh sure  being an order you know like this yeah  you know that that yes of course uh you  know that has  demands uh you know more  quickness uh alacrity intelligence you  know than than just being a member of  the voting public um so anyway uh  uh  i i guess i i  yeah yeah i i don't know everyone so you  know you see the image um you know of of  forcing your daughter to brush her teeth  when she doesn't she's not old or  intelligent enough to understand why  it's necessary to brush your teeth that  is an image found in in ancient buddhism  mutatus mutandus one of the standard  images used in in buddhist philosophy in  the ancient period is of what to do when  your small child either an infant or a  toddler is choking on something it's  choking on food so i think people had  this experience often enough that it was  a vivid image they could relate to and  it describes having to reach your finger  down the throat of the child in order to  remove an obstruction to stop it from  suffocating or choking to death you know  and that obviously the child doesn't  enjoy this child may be terrified to  have your hand or your finger go down  their throat trying to to stop them from  choking you know  and indeed this may cause the child to  vomit you can you can imagine but in the  ancient world this was the kind of  medical emergency and  there is no 9-1-1 so on and so forth  this idea of having the prerogative the  privilege of being the adult who knows  better and who therefore imposes their  will on the child now you know um  look i've written a whole book about  this  yeah you know so i mean i i could i  could hear it frankly would be quite  easy for me to give a philosophical  lecture about it probably because i've  rehearsed and gathered and organized my  thoughts in in no more manifestos the  one thing i would i would say you know  so this isn't a multi-hour discussion of  this aspect of democracy the one thing  i'd say is this  the more  democracy you have because throughout  this whole video we've talked about the  fact that it's not  zero or 100 it's not a binary it's not  either you have democracy or you don't  you have slavery or you don't you have  veganism or you don't these aren't  simple all or nothing situations but the  more democracy you have the less  lazy  the power elite gets to be  all right now just say you can imagine  if um  let's say  you were in the position  of winning  the civil war in syria like within the  next five years you personally end up  being the dictator of syria on the basis  of a huge pile of dead bodies you fought  this war and the whole population that's  just the body count has been so huge the  civil war's going on for so long people  step back and just say okay your unsure  like people resign themselves to it your  faction your military has dominated this  society i think you can imagine at least  for a 10-year period after the close of  the civil war  you would really be able to rule just by  fiat whatever you say goes you don't  have to explain your plans to people you  don't have to reason them through  you don't have to deal with questions  and answers about the implications  you don't have to modify your plans on  the basis of feedback right  so i'm just saying getting this is it  generally is true whether it's 10 years  or 5 years or 20 years very often after  a really hard conflict you'll have a  period where people are resigned to  um  totally arbitrary political power put it  that way whether it's tyrannical or not  right people just say okay we'll accept  whoever's in charge because we're done  with  having so many thousands of people die  per month frankly in a state of in a  state of civil war okay but then compare  that to  if you were  a genuinely democratic leader in a  society where all the major decisions  involve a referendum and where you  really have to go out from town to town  you have to go around in a van  and give lectures and do q and a's from  town to town across the country  explaining to people why this referendum  is important why your political position  is correct why they need to understand  this and again it could be for for a  health issue like this it could be for  something that's that's from your  perspective is scientifically simple it  could be from from your perspective this  is just a simple scientific fact you  know we must brush our teeth or we must  abolish uh circumcision well you know  okay for me as an atheist it's obvious  that circumcision should be abolished  for muslim people it's not obvious for  for the majority of jewish and christian  people it's not obvious too there's a  really widespread phenomenon this idea  that cutting off part of your penis is a  really great idea guys well that you  know  imagine actually going from from town to  town and you know look i think it's been  a long time since that happened in in  the united states of america  i i think it's been a long time to  happen in france we talk about different  when was there that spirit of democracy  going from town to town but you know a  really touching a really moving example  of that in american history uh was the  basically coast-to-coast tour of lbj's  wife so this is the president lyndon  johnson his wife  she really gave lectures going from town  to town talking about why black people  should have political equality basically  that's what it was she was from the far  south he was from texas  and many of the crowds were very hostile  you know you could hear it like you  people came and you know people were  sitting with their arms crossed it was  really an error and this is a very  contentious idea now in reality they  didn't have a referendum they didn't  have that kind of democracy it was  decided from the top down it was one man  made the decision lbj himself made the  decision on an executive basis they were  gonna have racial equality and he  imposed it he imposed his will on  everyone in america and the history of  exactly how that was possible and the  ways in which it's connected to the  assassination of uh the guy who was  president immediately before him there's  a lot of interesting jiggery-pokery and  how that was possible but i would just  say even if you regard that just as  political theater as a kind of circus or  sideshow because the people didn't get  to vote on it they didn't get to have a  referendum and they didn't even elect  lyndon johnson they elected another guy  who was shot in the head you know so  there are a lot of ways we're sending  you know obviously most people today are  very happy that lyndon johnson did what  he did in relation to the status of  african americans former slaves etc in  america but my point is that there was  that humility and willingness to go from  town to town and engage people in that  discussion whether you think of that as  public education or what have you so  that that's the point we say is i uh  dictatorial power especially when  dealing with a short-term emergency it  may be very appealing it was in ancient  rome also it was a crucial aspect about  ancient roman government work basically  whenever there was an emergency they  they closed down the democratic society  they gave all the power to one dictator  and you know  they had temporary dictatorship declared  while they were fighting a particular  war or some other some other crisis of  this kind war civil war that kind of  thing um  however among the many problems of  having  you know  fiat power in government is just  power by decree whether it's a kingdom a  monarchy an aristocracy or just a very  corrupt system of democracy like  very little democracy  is that the elite becomes lazy  you know and they become lazy in that  most important way which is exactly i  mean so you said you've you've seen me  trying to compel my daughter to brush  your teeth but you've also seen me  explaining to her yes oh yeah you've  also seen me right right you just say  that you've also seen me intellectually  right right and i'm preparing her for  like it's like even if you're too young  to understand this now you will you've  seen me philosophically and politically  educating my daughter where i'm having  really sophisticated conversations  slowly and in a way she can understand  i'm asking her questions and she's  replying so just say even that you know  it's parallel to the laziness of a  parent if you're a parent who just gives  commands and just gives orders just as  you don't understand you can't  understand as opposed to being a parent  who really reasons these things through  kind of democratically even if you don't  get equal votes you know what i mean  where i said look i need you to  understand  so yeah there's a kind of laziness to be  avoided there that really matters  i think that is  absolutely  the strength of  right  that you should have when you are trying  to uh  coerce people into  doing something that is  the right thing to do um  so i i guess  just right yes so i just let's i'm to  bring this back to the real world in a  way that's that's very palpable okay  within my lifetime  where  is coercive veganism possible so this is  veganism by decree they just have a law  or constitution saying within this  territory there can be no animal  slaughter there can be no meat butter  salt it is possible i it is certainly  possible for example with a small island  where most of the money is made from  tourism you know and any of them frankly  you get a tiny island like tahiti or  something one of these small island  nations they could do it and you could  imagine it really being a kind of market  employee hey come to the only vegan  country the whole island is vegan yeah  it's fragrant sorry maybe whether or not  you think tahiti is attainable my point  is any small island that primarily  relies on international tourism for its  revenues the beauty of the island and  where they market and say hey look we  have tropical fruit we have all this  wonderful things we want to make this a  holiday destination for tourists  that is not only possible  it is plausible you know that you can  have an island where it's eco-tourism  and where they know  that they have like  there are beaches all over the world  there are beautiful beaches everywhere  and say hey we're the one island where  all the food is vegan where the whole  country is vegan even though it's a tiny  bit yeah that's that's attainable  um  i would also say you could have  particular provinces within india  you know particular cities or particular  provinces where for a small area within  india it's declared 100 vegan and  there's no meat can be bought and sold  in no slaughterhouses uh within sri  lanka hypothetically i doubt it'll  happen in sri lanka just based on my  knowledge of the place within an  intensely but a society like myanmar um  you know i think one you're familiar  with it's hard to imagine but what about  taiwan  you know  taiwan the majority of people eat huge  amounts of meat but you could have a  subculture within taiwan that gathers in  one town you know where there's one  little province okay within this  province  everything's going to be yes it's  possible yes it's attainable you know  what i mean  um  but again this relates back to  everything i've discussed  in this video okay but what will be the  significance  of coercive veganism  of it when it when people don't  understand that people don't accept it  or 90 of you like maybe 10 of people in  this island or in this world maybe 10 of  people really support the polls and  really understand it really understand  why it's worth doing right but we're 90  of people it's like i described before  if i married a religious person right  and i'm i'm just coerced into being  religious enough yes to keep the  relationship going when she may be  coerced into being just atheist enough  to satisfy me in this relationship you  know what is the value of having a  society  that is in this sense vegan enough  through coercion and look again  this isn't that hypothetical we just  tested the waters we just saw  having a society that's vaccinated  enough  right look well a lot of people don't  accept the science behind the vaccine a  lot of people challenge it yes and we  saw crazy coercion each country was  different the story of coercion in  australia in france like it's it's  really different if you guys watch the  debate between macron and uh lepen  this is the debate for who would be the  next leader of france  you will notice that at one point  macron says to le pam he says it as if  it's self-evidently ridiculous well if  what you want is to enforce secularism i  would say atheism but they say  secularism in french if what you want is  to enforce secularism  are you comfortable with a police  officer running down the street and  arresting someone for wearing a head  scarf a muslim headscarf  and what she said back she's not a very  witty or fast thinking woman what lepan  said back was well haven't you noticed  we just had the police running on the  street to arrest someone over a mask  over wearing or not wearing a  mask you know this is not shallow this  is not trivial so we've just lived  through a great kind of test case for  coercion and again i've made videos  sorry about what happened in china with  uh xinjiang it's another very  interesting testament can you imagine it  and if even one country had made it a  vote like yes right yes vote on what we  should sure should we shut down all gyms  should we shut down yeah right right  would that have been voted on by  somebody well and imagine each city  having a vote too like you say it  doesn't necessarily have to be national  uh colorado could have had a referendum  like colorado city colorado i'm just  saying each city or something could have  had direct democracy on these things and  i can  imagine with that consequence yeah  that's right that's right we were the  city  right  now we have to live with the  consequences there's right not going to  be any past requirements right this is  voted on we are the one place that is  right and then some other place that  would have voted another way and you'd  get to compare the outcomes  because of these i i really appreciate  what you said about the short-term  emergency and like that as you know this  is how the legal system is operating in  america that we're using these little  scraps of paper that have are the  results of  short-term uh emergencies you know the  decisions that were made at one time or  another by people who are dead now and  you know we don't have to be  we don't have to be living under their  influence forever you know this is this  is yes  well  okay so you know i really dislike thomas  jefferson as a person i'm not a fan of  thomas jefferson but one of the things  he said again and again  is that laws are a way for  the living  to be bullied  by the dead  that our dead ancestors are bullying us  are coercing us through laws  now many people  interpret this in terms of his own  decision to not keep his promises to his  deceased wife  you know that when  it's an interesting aspect he felt that  the promises he made to his wife were  only valid while she was alive this is  apparently part of us now that she's  dead he's got to do his own thing life  is for the living so that was that was  part of his philosophy  you know whether or not that related to  his own sex life and i guess another  another story but  politically it's interesting that he  came to the conclusion he wanted all  laws and all constitutions to be written  anew i'm sorry i forget if it was every  uh 30 years but it's something like that  yet at times guys i think it was in  dozens of years or something like every  three dozen years  i'm sorry the exact numbers i forget but  he felt that laws should elapse  and there should be new laws written and  constitutions should elapse you have to  write a totally new constitution every  so many years that people should come  together that it was really important  not a lot not to allow the spirits of  the dead to have coercive power over the  living that that life is for the living  and that law is for the living and to  cut off this kind of endless cycle of  bullying for lack of a better term yeah  of coercion coercion across the  generations should be cut off it should  be for one generation only it's great  that's a that's a great comment i think  because and it makes me think how much  more involved would people be if the  that were if those were the stakes that  every 30 years or however many years um  you know that we had to come to this  conclusion you know something that i was  thinking about when you were reading the  uh messages that you got the private  messages um  for somebody like that who had decided  to be vegan for four years um or  vegetarian  you know i my ex-boyfriend he became  vegan for me and the minute that we  broke up he stopped being vegan so this  happens my ex-wife  similar story not exactly similar story  i would like to think that if they were  living if those two people this those  two examples of people who at one time  or another  were you know  believed in  veganism enough right at least had  thought through the principles enough  that they agreed to live this way uh and  changed their lifestyle changed how they  made food in their homes and what they  did when they were out and about you  know what kind of places you can go and  where you can eat like you know  adding these restrictions to your life  you know i  if they had lived in a society that did  coerce them into doing this you know do  you think at some stage they would  you know  reach that level of acceptance and then  even though they were coerced and do it  at one point or another then they would  realize that you know it's the right  thing to do so  that's  good but i mean i think you know that  you asked that one a marriage is a  society of just two people  and that's that's exactly what you're  dealing with  and you know the other is  max sterner talks about this a lot too  the type of obedience you get in society  with law like in some ways talking about  laws and constitutions is profoundly  irrelevant to what we're talking about  because we want to talk about the actual  will of the people  the will of the people is not the law  it's not the constitution you know what  i mean but the type of uh obedience you  can extract is normally about as much as  the obedience of traffic laws you know  people will drive faster than the speed  limit whenever they can  i've never met anyone who believes in  the principle of the speed limit they  only respond to coercion they only  respond to the threat of fines and  imprisonment and in the 21st century  this has changed because now there can  be these hidden cameras you know now  this is but in the past when i was a kid  it was really like there were some  highways where you could get away with  speeding you know and  many people i remember seeing adults  sitting around and discussing it which  highways you could drive what speed on  because they would keep a mental map of  where the police  you know would arrest people and where  they would and so on you know the de  facto speed line  so that is generally the type of um  the type of obedience you can compel  from people now with that having been  said  you know um  if the existence of planet earth depends  on it if we're talking about global  warming we're talking about ocean  acidification rising carbon levels in  the atmosphere changing the chemical  composition of the ocean and then this  really bringing about a terrible  doomsday scenario this is not the only  problem with global warming but it's  it's the one i choose to emphasize for  various reasons that i've made videos  talking about the past for really  dealing with apocalyptic  consequences maybe  driving the speed limit you know maybe  that is the kind of thing we have to  work with but the emphasis i'm placing  on in my analysis  i'm placing emphasis on the laziness of  the ruling class the laziness of the  elite as compared to the intellectual  dynamism that democracy fosters and  again it's not a hundred or zero but by  having  more democracy you get more education  and look i'm canadian  my real sincere feeling is that  canadians are so intellectually lazy  because they can be because they can get  away with it and i don't want that i  want this kind of democracy that really  really you know  inspires and stimulates and motivates  intellectual dynamism dynamism for the  elite and where people frankly become  elite because of their intellectual  dynamism their active research and  informed dependent because of what they  can contribute positively to democracy  in that way whether that's as  intellectual dissidents or as  conformists  okay guys i'm catching up with your  written comments now  so with several people asking if my  books are on sale  i thought it was obvious from what i  said before but um one of my books you  can get on amazon right now for about  one dollar in europe is exactly 99 cents  in europe in america i believe it's one  dollar and eight so i'm not trying to  turn a profit on that book obviously you  can get that on amazon the second book  no more manifestos is not out yet but  many chapters of it have been shared  within patreon so again if you pay one  dollar within patreon you could read  several chapters of it and some people  talk about it as if it has already been  published because  um  because the chapters have been shared  because they've read a certain number of  chapters of it  so here you go i will i will post the  link in the chat  and yes as with everything on amazon  there's a separate page  for each country so there's a canadian  page an american page a japanese yeah  i've seen it go to amazon japan and you  can order japan so on and so forth  great question i mean seemingly  unrelated but profoundly related quote  do you hold nicocado avocado solely  responsible for the path he's currently  on  or do you consider him a product of  coercion  within a sick society of misaligned  incentives  so i'll give you my answer because you  ask me  i hold nicocado avocado 100 percent  responsible and so solely responsible  it's a good it's a good  just well phrased your question yes i do  um  do we live in a society where the  majority of people  instead see him as the victim of you  know outside forces or something that's  probably a more important question but  yeah i i see him absolutely 100  responsible now both melissa and i have  people in our families who drink too  much alcohol and whose lives have been  ruined by alcohol i'm i'm not going to  specify this but both melissa and i have  for you in the audience most of you have  probably one relative somewhere  um  [Music]  do i hold those people solely  responsible  for  being a drunk being an alcoholic  the way in which alcohol has ruined  their life yes yes i do i hold them 100  solely responsible and in as much as any  of those people have ever talked to me  that's what i've said to them face to  face i've said it's on you  now um i'll just give you a more complex  example and look sorry why  sobriety is something you do  alone  it doesn't rely on an institution  it doesn't rely on having access to a  library  you know it doesn't rely on you having a  teacher  you know  now  learning to read braille  to read braille by touch i have to  specify because some people actually if  you can see  they learn to read but only by looking  at braille  i have been told i have both read  descriptions of this and on youtube her  descriptions you really need a teacher  you really need a certain kind of  institution to get the knack of using  your sense of touch it's quite a complex  process to master reading braille  reading sign language using sign  language okay  if you ask someone look why haven't you  learned to read braille why haven't you  learned  sign language  that's much harder to put on one person  right they may really be able to say  look where i live  i didn't have access to the institutions  the resources the help the support i  need to  to learn braille or learn sign language  right  and  i myself when you look at my life  there are a lot of things that have gone  horribly wrong where i can't say it's on  me i can't say it's it's all my fault  because there's this kind of  institutional context that this kind of  political contact context that's made  what i might  made what i wanted to do impossible  um  where it relied on other people and and  what have you you know  um but no these these kinds of examples  it's 100 on that person i'm sorry i will  return to you reading and replying to  the the comments the comments that i'm  leaving anonymous for that that inspired  this video so  so look here's a here's a great example  sorry freda freda had a couple comments  i wanted to respond to  freda says quote  even with applying sunscreen to prevent  skin cancer  many people don't know how this how  important this is that's what frida says  so freda  i've done some scientific research on  this  and on purely on the basis of science  i believe sunscreen meaning suntan  lotion the lotion applied to your skin i  believe it's a scam  100 based on scientific evidence not  based on anything else  and my claims are not crazy i mean if  you want to do the reading you can i  read one article about it that was in  the ecologist magazine is a recall i  think it was a dutch  magazine that published in english i  think that was a situation magazine if  not maybe it was a british version of a  dutch publication but it was this i read  this completely well researched  scientific factual article in no way  in no way based on religious claims or  whatever  and it's like guess what you know what  the world's most effective sunscreen is  it's wearing a hat it's wearing a shirt  made of solid cotton like this is a  complete joke to think you can have a  translucent liquid that you rub on your  skin that's effective  in preventing the damage of the sun and  if you think you can rub this liquid on  your skin then swim in the ocean  with this and then get out of the ocean  and it's still there invisibly blocking  and reflecting the sun's rays there's a  lot of wishful thinking so like my point  is not to say  uh you're wrong you're an idiot or  something my point is you've raised this  as an example of something that's  scientifically simple and self-evident  right i've done a little bit of research  on it and i'm saying to you  no you're wrong now if you have a good  democratic process  those kinds of things can come out all  right  it is obvious  to me  that antidepressant drugs like prozac  don't work  and it's so obvious  i totally talk about it as a  self-evident scientific fact right and i  can't believe anyone who does the  reading doesn't discover the same thing  i do right well imagine if you really  had a democratic process of debate  to draw those things out to really  engage the public in those arguments and  like i completely admit back in  1985  probably everyone would have voted to  make the antidepressants legal and have  the government pay for them make them  free for everyone who wanted to take  them but like by 1995  by 2005 by 2015  like you know scientifically it becomes  more and more evident that these drugs  don't work and they have terrible  negative effects so  now none of us have experienced this  nobody in the world lives in a society  where even matters of scientific fact  matters of science and health policy are  decided democratically so there's a real  sense in which we don't know what that  would be like we do not know what it  would be like in which the general  public decides these things and not  secret closed-door meetings  between  leaders of industry  and a small number of government  bureaucrats that's how it's decided not  just the united states but in most  countries in europe  last description that kind of read i  think it was in denmark i mean some of  the supposedly good democracies in  europe you read about  the actual meetings that took place  between these incredibly wealthy  corporations and you know the  representatives of the department for  health and safety or whatever it was  uh you know and there's  there is in effect money on the table  there's real patronage  and you know it's just horrifying um the  decisions that are made quote unquote in  the public interest that are not  democratic or not in the public interest  and you know sorry it's now relatively  well known i think in large part thanks  to vegan activism  um  you know the way in which health policy  was developed for the american diet the  so-called food pyramid the role of  lobbying of the meat industry the dairy  industry and so on lobbying  so yeah um how much democracy is enough  democracy and what what would happen  because guys i'm skeptical if you had  more democracy  maybe the health guidelines in america  would be worse you know but but over  time  that would intensify the level of  political education the level of  political engagement like maybe at first  more than 50 of americans just want to  say cigarettes are healthy beer is  healthy alcohol is healthy they like  pork so they want to say pork is healthy  and maybe that at first in the 1950s is  what democracy is  tending to us but maybe decade by decade  you start to get again because the elite  then has to work hard the elite can't  just be fatuous and disengaged the elite  gets out there and really engages people  and says look  these are the consequences of drinking  alcohol these are the consequences of  smoking cigarettes this is the  consequence of having cholesterol in  your diet whether that cholesterol comes  from pork or cheese  and then start to make laws that make  sense you know  um  i'm not  recklessly optimistic but the point is  you know the choice you have to make is  how democratic a country do you want to  be again read my book read no more  manifestos especially but you know i i  do not believe that aristocracy is the  way forward and i do believe that  aristocracy is the system of government  we now have  i do want to say something but i don't  do it do it dude it's a good time  yeah i do want to say something about i  want to get too off topic but it was  just kind of amazing to me to think of  the public health crisis that we've just  gone through and all of the  diseases that i know to be preventable  because i'm vegan because i've done the  research that there isn't coercion on  this this scale you know there's there  was so much you know about uh you know  making sure that you're vaccinated  making sure that you're wearing your  mask closing down restaurants closing  down gyms just the scale of uh you know  coercion in this and  where is it for heart disease where is  it for uh diabetes you know and you know  make a microcode avocado i'm sure he's  diabetic now if if he hasn't been  diagnosed i'm sure he will be soon you  know this is a an example of somebody  who went from being healthy to having  these problems with obesity probably  he's been hospitalized for heart disease  you know it's it's yeah he is an  example of just how quickly this can  happen because you're not eating a vegan  diet you know it's not like he's got  some genetic predisposition to becoming  obese and that's why he's you know  experiencing or or heart disease or  diabetes it's  yeah it's the diet so  anyway yeah well okay look she wants to  see it for one second  you know you say it's surprising there  isn't more coercion on these issues but  i think the very simple answer  my response to that  is to say  where does coercion come from  and where does it go in any of these  societies now you know  iraq  has a democracy as a democracy that was  introduced by the american military but  they do they have votes they have  elections so on and so forth um  there is coercion  of sunni against shiite shiite against  sunni  you know what i mean and  they know what they're doing they know  you know where the coercion comes from  they know where it's going there's a  sense of an objective  right with something like health  with something like education  also right  coercion is very rare in society because  there isn't a clear sense of a  particular outcome  and there isn't a particular  constituency demanding it right so you  think about in politics where does  coercion come from  where is it going what do i mean is  coercion normally arises  when there is a definite constituency  demanding it  and where there is an objective  however palpable or infallible well that  that this constituency understands  you know that that they desire that they  they want to achieve so those are those  are the normal  political preconditions for  for coercion  so  you know  atherosclerosis if you don't know what  atherosclerosclerosis means  you should  atherosclerosis  an incredibly high percentage of  americans have atherosclerosis it would  only be a slight exaggeration to say it  affects everyone  basically everyone who is not vegan in  the united states of america  it's only a slight exaggeration it's a  rounding error the vast majority of  americans atherosclerosis is a problem  atherosclerosis can result in  damage to your heart it can result in  damage to your brain  and one of the most common also results  in erectile dysfunction from that so  it's not going to your whole circulatory  system is impacted  and of course it also can result in  death premature death but the the loss  of quality of life you lost your ability  to think to lost your ability to walk  upstairs atherosclerosis but  you know is there one particular  constituency and one particular outcome  the benefit of addressing  atherosclerosis is incredibly  diffuse right  and there isn't a concentrated  particular special interest group  pressing for it now guys sorry when you  think special interest group many of you  especially if you're vegan will start to  think about the corrupting influence of  the pharmaceutical industry this this  kind of conspiracy thing with these  things okay but i'm going to give you a  positive example gay rights  who was the constituency pressing for  gay rights there was a very obvious  special minority group special interest  group right and it wasn't the majority  it was a minority of people right  what was the  outcome what was the you know what was  the destination so one of the examples i  like to give is  forcing school boards forcing the school  system to be willing to hire and employ  an openly homosexual teacher this is  coercion because before none of them  wanted to do it it was a very widespread  prejudice that you couldn't have a gay  or a lesbian teacher but especially gay  men were excluded from this this kind of  profession okay so this is this is  coercion now again there are also some  things with housing and rent that  someone should be able to be openly gay  and still rent to home have no no  prejudice in this sense yeah which is  still a federal right yeah yeah yeah  it's still it's still legally an issue  yes um but you know uh my point is to  say  there was a constituency there's a  definite outcome or destination  from this you know coercion arises so  yeah that's i i think you know i'm sorry  i mean for some of you guys this may be  obvious but for some of you it's the  first time you're thinking it through in  your life  um  yeah that is interesting yeah to to make  that comparison because right you know i  can think of some campaigns that were ex  exceedingly  um  prevalent when i was growing up uh  for this one type of cancer for breast  cancer yes breast cancer awareness uh  you know it's  i don't know if it's this it's not  especially strange  let me give you one more example some of  you will relate to this viscerally know  exactly what i'm talking about and some  of you you'll have to use your  imagination  rats  make people's lives miserable every day  in the city and in the countryside being  beset by rats being marauded by rats you  may not know this but australia is a  great example australia is totally  infested with rats or plagues of rats  millions and billions of rats huge  numbers new york city  is infested by rats in canada  we have one province  called alberta it's a huge area it's  bigger than i think any country in  europe but it's bigger than it's i'm  sorry now some of you can google it how  big is alberta compared to france  metropolitan france how big is alberta  comparison  alberta has a lot of land mass it's not  a small state like delaware or something  it's a huge area alberta okay  in alberta there are no rats  zero because of a government policy  this is attainable for alberta it's  totally attainable for australia in case  you didn't know australia is an island  it's a you know australia as a whole in  tasmania all right we can live  without rats  and in most of these places the rats are  talking about are not indigenous they  were introduced with the arrival of  white people  another great example by the way is  hawaii  you know rats okay but rats  make everyone's life miserable we have  rats not inside our apartment but here  around our apartment building we see we  see rats we live surrounded by rats and  if you've had rats inside your home  you know if you've had to live inside  your farm or eating eating your veggies  we have we've had rats eating the the  plants we were farming okay now i'm  using this intentionally because it's a  very challenging example for vegans okay  if we eliminate rats the way alberta did  everyone will benefit every like  literally everybody in society the rich  and the poor rich people got to deal  with it's horrible if you own a big  property as a rich you can be a  millionaire and you still have to deal  with rats but of course poor people in  the slums poor people in the ghetto  right  okay  but there's no special interest there's  no constituency and that outcome right  who can see it who can visualize it who  can measure it and quantify it and say  look this is worth a billion dollars  right like the improvement in our lives  and indeed you could calculate how much  will you save in agriculture costs even  with the building we used to live in so  nothing building me now but you know i  talked to this in a youtube video five  years ago or something but you know i  remember talking to the manager of the  building they had to have rat killers  come every week they had a pest control  company coming every week to check on on  trap for rats cockroaches pigeons you  know and i talked about this in terms of  the contradictions of veganism that you  know you pay rent you're paying someone  to kill rats on your behalf that's you  know you may say you don't kill rats  well you rent an apartment in a certain  percentage of your apartment absolutely  my point is but if you calculate the  benefit  every apartment building in the in the  com in the country paying for pest  control every farm  paying for pest control or somehow  managing killing and poisoning rats  right  if this is worth billions of dollars  this is a huge problem with the solution  and nobody wants to solve it yeah so i i  put it under that heading  it's diffuse in its benefits yeah  you would think that would be the case  with you know hospitals i know i know  with heart disease with atherosclerosis  i know wait but look here's here's the  problem alexandria ocasio-cortez can't  talk like this all right i'm sorry but  like this is the tragedy i listened to a  lot of bernie sanders i had many youtube  videos responding to bernie sanders  bernie sanders is also not in my level  it's like i wish i could tell you there  are all kinds of brilliant political  leaders i could look up to who have a  nuanced understanding  bob ray is not on my level holy [ __ ]  let's get the canadian politicians who  are numb like i wish i could tell you we  have a culture that's crowded with  dissident intellectuals like me or even  conformist intellectuals who really like  were able to do this is not scripted  this is completely spontaneous to deal  with these issues and start thinking  about but we don't i have no  contemporaries you know i'm all alone  and just even being able to talk this  stuff through with my audience okay  great  [Laughter]  yeah this is why i like doing this as  live stream because a lot of these  issues i think they really are  meaningful and important for whoever  gets to hear this  but they're not issues i would ever make  a standalone video about like i wouldn't  i wouldn't address i wouldn't sit to  think down and record a video in the way  guys if you have a second hit the thumbs  up button please do it'll help more  people discover discover this both while  the conversation's going and after the  fact  um  catching up with your comments  [Music]  um  whoo here's a here's an irrelevant but  interesting question clouds asked well  cloud says quote i'm aware you're  critical of the english translation of  max sterner do you have any  recommendations to learn about his  philosophy despite the translation  um i saw someone asking about this on  reddit yesterday and i was tempted to to  type out a whole essay  um  okay so really briefly if you guys don't  know the philosophy who max turner is i  have made videos in the past you can  search just for the name  search for a max i think he's the only  person called max i've talked about but  um  i have made videos discussing the  philosophy of mac sterner in the past  there are basically three problems one  is just the quality of translation  itself  two there's a special problem with the  use of the conjunctive voices in german  young thieves einstein  you know um he  sterner very often uses this sort of  hypothetical voice it's not that it's  impossible to translate  but  to my knowledge the available  translations struggle with this  um  [Music]  that sometimes makes it hard to  understand sometimes means you'll lose  the sense of humor or  what it is he's getting at or why  something things does but the third  problem is understanding the historical  context when max sterner uses the word  liberal  he's discussing what liberalism meant in  germany at that time which is  unbelievably different from what  liberalism means for us here and now  what it means in 2022 in miami florida  or something  so you know those are the problems and  they're they're kind of three separate  but  related problems  and  you know  what other languages do you speak i mean  i don't know if the spanish translation  is better of sterner i don't know if the  russian translation is better you know i  i suspect that it is  um  but all three of those problems  as far as i know are impossible to  overcome they're just something you can  cope with i knew the political and  historical context quite well when i  started reading sterner i learned more  while i read it but i'd already done a  lot of research about that period you  know to understand people like karl marx  and  these other people and then yeah i mean  the other thing um to remember is you  also to some extent need to know  the people sterner is criticizing  many of whom were much more famous and  politically influential at that time  than karl marx but they've now been  forgotten you know and those names are  in the book explicitly like it's not  like i'm saying you have to imagine like  he he names the people he's criticizing  but to understand who they were  many people read sterner and think that  it's kind of crazy and over the top for  those reasons like oh what he's saying  about liberalism is completely crazy but  they don't understand what liberalism  meant at that time  in that culture in that geographical and  chronological context and once you do  it's it's not so crazy and again his  criticism of these other particular  authors and thinkers when you've seen  how crazy they are than what he's saying  about them starts to make sense  um  but you know uh  i just say i i  i find it touching that there are young  people on the internet today who are  really moved by sterner and really  motivate the change to change something  in their lives  but  sterner is pretty much incomprehensible  and unapproachable in modern english and  from a 21st century perspective like  unless you've done all this research on  the political context and so like it's  not with any  egoism  not with any egoism that i'd really  recommend reading my own books instead  i'd recommend i recommend watching my  own videos about nihilism  and my own videos about max turner too  but reading a future of an illusion  reading no more manifestos these are the  two books i've just written within the  last couple months or whatever  um  those  i really think that's much more useful  for everyone  and you know  okay but conversely it's brief  statement sterner might as well wrap it  up  why is sterner worth reading well  understanding sterner lets you  understand karl marx and  from obviously an anti-marxist  perspective it really lets you  understand that understanding sterner  lets you understand hegel again from an  anti-hegelian perspective so there were  a lot of famous well let's understand  emmanuel kant to some extent too it's  not so much but indirectly you know a  lot of these names from that period  they've become these kind of  unquestioned impossible to challenge  giants in philosophy  and specifically and especially in  political philosophy it's insane i don't  know why would anyone respect emmanuel  kant's opinion about politics what would  anyone respect what hagel has stable  politics why would anyone respect what  karl marx has to say about china what  komarks has to say about india it's  insane but those names have become  towering  so taking the time to understand sterner  and the political context he wrote in  and you know  yes it's meaningful in that way  um is part of the demolition  of the the 19th century mystique  hegel marx et cetera et  cetera another specific example it's  somewhat useful in understanding  the origins of anthropology and how  those are being contested some of the  big tectonic changes that were happening  in philosophy politics academia  and  yeah i mean sterner is also a voice in  the  political and philosophical response to  economics economics emerging as a  science and as a trade  and then a lot of what went on in  political philosophy for a hundred years  was a was a response to that  so you know yeah it's meaningful it's  rewarding in in those ways but for you  for your life for what you're going to  do in the next five years  again with no egoism i think my own  writing is way more important  and  you know sterner can't compete with it  for those reasons but understanding the  time in which sterner was alive  of sterner's writing is way better and  again sterner it does just kind of  shine this light on karl marx on hegel  and uh feuerbach on these other  philosophers at that time that then it's  very mutually illuminating you can  understand everything going on and you  understand the way which people today  misunderstand all this stuff oh right  now uh how could i forget friedrich  nietzsche i mean like that's the funny  thing about sterner  sterner without ever writing about  nietzsche i mean nietzsche's work is  partly derivative of sterner like it's  my point is it's not the other way  around sterner is not derivative nisha  nietzsche red and was partly inspired by  stern but sterner  in effect  debunks nietzsche even though this is  chronologically impossible i would even  say sterner debunks schopenhauer to some  extent so a lot of what was going on in  germany at that time and including after  sterner's death you know the  fame or flourishing of nietzsche being  subsequent um a lot of it is kind of  again this mutually eliminating way if  you want to understand that period and  some of those names are still important  to some people  um  sure that's valuable but  what you're doing with the next five  years of your life what we're all going  to do in the next 50  years i'm sorry it's not sterner it's  you got to read eisel mazzard  and i what am i going to tell you do i  have a lot of competition  who do you know who's better publishing  books on veganism  who do you know who's better publishing  books about nihilism you know like you  know political philosophy you know  really radical dissident political  philosophy i don't have a lot of  competition guys like oh yeah if anyone  writes into me saying you know i liked  your book but compared to peter singer  compared to gary francione  you know i i have very little  competition in both but yeah no but but  legitimately like i'll say this both to  flatter myself and to flatter sterner  sure sterner is my competition he's  absolutely a book on the same shelf with  my books absolutely but  you know  ethically  emotionally and intellectually i think  my my books outclassed sterner  sterner did what he could but he only  took it so far as you know sterner  wasn't vegan  infamously he opened a milk shop  [Laughter]  he opened a milk shop on  kind of  quasi-communist principles kind of  workers co-op workers collective milk  shop to try to benefit the dairy farmers  kind of thing  and it failed  [Laughter]  but also his theory of politics and  theory of democracy and so he could only  take it so far he kind of takes the  critique and its implications only up to  this limited point and i go much further  um but yeah i mean you know what can i  tell you there's there's a reason why  for so many centuries people have drawn  a kind of motivation and inspiration  from sterner and i absolutely aspire to  that same position i hope that 200 years  after i've died i hope people still  really are finding a kind of inspiration  and these in these two books i've  written even if they're the last two  books i ever write i certainly do not  intend to ever write a second book  comparable to no more manifestos i mean  that to be my really final statement  about politics and political philosophy  that's why i've taken so much time with  it to be this kind of definitive  statement but there's all kinds of other  writing i'd like to do  i currently very much have in mind  writing a comedy not a comedic novel or  a novel that is a comedy  um i'd like to do comedy writing there's  a lot of other creative writing i'd like  to do and i may go into filmmaking and i  may go into standard comedy and so on  but i do not see the rest of my life as  being a reiteration of the principles  set down in  in no more manifestos nor reiteration  explained in  future of an illusion and again i've  said this before but very briefly the  material that is in my book future of an  illusion  it is not on this channel it is not  repeating or reiterating what you will  see or hear in any of my youtube videos  oh is king of kanto here in the audience  that's weird i guess king of king of  kanto must have me blocked and then i  can't see his or her comments that's  kind of funny  so i have people here were replying to  king oh no oh there we go sorry  so king of kanto asks here's a really  deep question hey if i go vegan can i  lose 86 kilos by december  i assume i assume this is a joke so but  i will i will choose to take this joke  seriously  um  you can lose weight on any  diet  the question  is  what kind of person do you want to be  if you ask me can you lose weight in a  diet that consists of  coffee  whiskey  and bacon  the answer is yes you can  what kind of person  do you  want to be  i do not want to be the [ __ ] who  lost 60 pounds on  coffee whiskey and bacon okay i don't  want to be the person who makes excuses  for smoking cigarettes who makes excuses  for drinking alcohol or makes excuses  for  you know raising pigs in captivity  slitting their throats and eating their  flesh that's not who i want to be  okay  can you lose weight on a vegan diet yes  can you gain weight on a vegan diet yes  ultimately either you're vegan or not  because you're capable of understanding  that it's the right thing to do  you know  um  there are all kinds of fad diets that  are well documented  on the internet you know  and all of them can work  you know  most other people had much more  encouraging replies to that  someone  recommends smoothies with black  green smoothies with black pepper and  turmeric  you ever put black pepper and turmeric  in a smoothie man  guessing that clears your sinuses  so look henry gann says and by the way i  don't take this as a stupid or shallow  comment hamrigan says quote the  eradication of smallpox points to the  possibility of the world coming together  in certain circumstances that's right  that's right there are numerous examples  of that and in a sense when you examine  the political history of those they're  they're more worrying than they are  encouraging america made seat belts  mandatory in a very peculiar political  process was it democratic  no  a small minority of people who cared a  lot about seat belts  got this law passed you know it's it's  interesting but when things have  happened nominally in the in the public  interest that are ushered into existence  through  small numbers of elites coming together  to make it happen  uh i'd mention also the real history  of how  workplace health and safety standards  were past the united states in all 50  states  it's interesting but again once you kind  of scratch the surface once you really  look into the process whereby these  legal legal changes happen  it's more worrying than it is  encouraging but yes no there there are i  mean i think you know obviously i don't  know if anyone here thought i was  pessimistic about democracy i'm just  trying to really talk through the issues  and all their implications and not in a  shallow  way  um  but it would be completely ridiculous  for someone to say democracy never works  or for someone to say that referendums  never work and it's always amused me  that the british will so shamelessly say  that  um you know they had a referendum in  england  so-called brexit referendum and you  really got to see how aristocratic the  british still are  face to face i heard so many british  people saying openly shamelessly well  you see this is why democracy could  never work this is why letting the  people vote on these things could never  really completely yeah  and you know we also have to you know  obviously you guys are entitled to draw  your own conclusions tell me something  did democracy work like look back at  look back at brexit look what happened  you know all the doomsayers and the  economic forecasts all this [ __ ]  that went on with brexit i mean you know  um is brexit a positive example or a or  a negative example so you know  the british are incredibly uncomfortable  with this and that's a problem that  indicates a deep problem in their  society that has to be addressed one way  or the other  um  democracy in libya  uh democracy in we just read an article  about it the other day that's right  yes thank you my sweet uh democracy in  tunisia yeah i still think of it as  tunis for some reason around the tunisia  i don't know why i just might probably  have read too many documents from my  older era but yeah you know um  [Music]  yeah we have a lot of tough questions  about democracy but it's it's as it's  just as misleading to ignore the  successes as it is to ignore the the  failures  and you know i mean every empire that  ever existed used the excuse the people  are not ready for democracy the people  are not mature enough for democracy in  the british empire they especially like  to say that the people are not masculine  enough that the people are still too  effeminate that was really the wording  used uh in in the british empire  interestingly yeah the the men were  still too effeminate to take up the very  masculine responsibility of of democracy  and so on um  you know it's anyway people are  they're quick to justify the notion that  uh democracy one day but not yet  oh sure but look even  south korea that today is a very  successful democracy um you know you can  criticize democracy in south korea i'm  not saying nothing's wrong with it but  they had a long period of transitional  dictatorship you know before they got to  mars it was a real question how much  democracy how soon would the south  korean people be able to to handle you  know  so again someone called uh  moonin smith says quote ssris are  fundamentally dangerous to society in my  opinion  we have made many many youtube videos  talking about this i have a playlist  that is called anti-antidepressants  i can get it for you but i just look it  up i say we because my girlfriend really  has been part of that but there are just  many many many videos already discussing  that and passionately on my channel so  i'm i'm not going to get into it here  but to say i am anti-antidepressants is  an understatement i'm a i'm a passionate  advocate on that issue and have been for  i don't know more than 10 years whatever  it is and look i just say melissa and i  have talked about it like that's such an  important issue  soon as a conversation was like look do  you want to let this take over our lives  do you want to let activism or  lobbying government or public education  be our full-time like we can start a  foundation and start collecting  donations to make  you know this our full-time profession  but you know do you want to let this  take over your life or not so no it's a  tremendously uh tremendously important  question  um  yeah  white rice yellow lentils and a  multivitamin are all you need so that  this comment from mx2 in the audience so  i just want to ask mx2 i don't know if  he's still here he or she but it looks  like he  um have you ever lived that way because  i have  i have lived  literally on nothing but  white rice yellow lentils and a  multivitamin and i didn't i didn't even  drink fruit juice or drink soy milk i  have lived for periods of time where  that was all i ate was a multivitamin  pill  uh white rice and yellow lentils and  there was a period of time when i had  garlic also which was a delight you know  to have garlic with it  and then i had a period of time where  there was no more garlic and it was just  white rice yeah yeah  and as you may be guessing correctly  this was due to absolute scarcity uh  when i was living in northwestern laos  and i remember so these were very poor  people in northwestern laos that's why  we were there  but um to be fair the people who were in  the town were not the poorest of the  poor like the poorest of the poor were  living in caves in the wilderness living  in a shanty and like the people who were  in the town they're poor  uh really their total income  less than 15 us dollars a month but  still they weren't the poorest of the  poor there were people who didn't have  homes or didn't have houses or weren't  in the in the town who were even poorer  than that but even as desperately poor  as the people there were they all knew i  was vegetarian or vegan however you want  to put it like i'm just saying in their  culture whatever they thought of this  um  [Music]  you know  and  i remember this one moment i remember  especially but there were there were a  couple moments with this there's one  moment where this woman who was herself  a poor farmer  um she saw me  delighted to find a single mango that  had dropped from a mango tree i hadn't  eaten any fruit in such a long time i'd  just been eating  uh white rice uh yellow lentils etc and  i was so happy to see this mango that i  dropped from a tree and i ran over and  picked it up and then i discovered you  know it was absolutely inedible it was  totally as hard as one of those mangoes  that fell  prematurely it was inedible and whatever  the expression of my face was she found  it heartbreaking she was totally  emotionally moved by this  and um she beckoned me over and she said  here  i forget what she gave me she had some  kind of fruit or vegetable in her in her  hovel that she got over because she  reckoned she knew starvation she knew  whatever the look on my face was  and again in my case it wasn't  absolute starvation i had  white rice  yellow lentils and a vitamin pill but i  had nothing else  nothing  not even garlic anymore you know um so  that was really uh an  incredibly monotonous unlimited diet and  if i didn't have the vitamin pills i  would have died i'm sure you know  so yeah that's the most extreme  i mean it was forced by circumstances  but yeah the other thing i could have  eaten was meat right the other available  food  anyway i'm i'm sorry i don't remember  what the fruit or vegetable was that she  had to hand to me if i if i dug in my  remember there was something  she could give me some kind of but she  she knew she knew i mean i think in  their culture they just think of me as a  buddhist vegetarian as this strictly  buddhist vegetarian and what that meant  to them you know i don't know  yep but it's possible you can um  you can live and you can thrive on on  nothing more than that  we have yet more praise for black pepper  and turmeric in a green smoothie  guys  thumbs up if you want us to make a  youtube video i don't mind i'm i'm kind  of a fan of black pepper do we own  teamwork i think we do we're not using  we have turmeric to use up  so we we could do i don't black pepper  we have somewhere i think we don't have  a way to crush it  so that's the problem but yeah because  i've lived in cambodia and stuff i'm a  bit of a fan of black power my ex-wife  was not a black pepper person just goes  to show we never should have uh  we never should have been together but  yeah  where do you stand on black pepper let's  just get really deep here for me  you're a black pepper  already  yeah i i don't you know a relationship i  don't remember you eating a lot of black  pepper but that's just circumstance  yeah  you do okay okay good good good  yeah when i make pasta for you i don't  remember you adding black pepper to it  i'm not  this is not cause i'm gonna do deep  complain you know and black pepper is  one of those things  people think it all tastes the same  and then you start developing a snobbery  for good versus bad black pepper and you  find out it doesn't all taste the same  so yeah many things are like that in  life there was such a thing as good and  excellent black pepper and like i say i  used to live in laos i used to live in  cambodia so i have some sensitivities  things um anyway where where today is  the great homeland of black pepper you  know i used to have a family living in  the great homeland of of mustard dijon  france that's another incredibly simple  ingredient but actually has a range of  flavor okay guys thanks for putting up  with this digression this this episode  has been sponsored by  cambodian black pepper  yeah i wish get me uh get me a sponge  okay so return to reading this this  comment from a viewer in the audience  all right  um i might as well read the whole thing  again  uh rapidly but you'll see about half of  this you haven't heard yet i only read  the first half quote  as for being vegan i understand the  health benefits i have been vegetarian  and vegan while i worked at whole foods  all the way through my college years but  the conundrum i constantly i constantly  ran into was this  most vegans focus is to to refuse the  use of animal products but i met very  few who realized how nearly impossible  it would be  do they not eat fruit too because the  skin is shined with the shellacking of  dead insects do they build their own  houses because the wood caulk used in  linoleum  uses some parts of horse glue do they  not drink water out of the sink because  some part of the water in some states is  uh filtered using  bone shards to clean the water which  means bone char but still the bones of  cattle etc that's charred and then used  to filter some products  and now i continue the quote this part  you haven't heard before quote  for one to truly never hurt any animal  we would be living in houses we built  ourselves clothes we sowed from scratch  and eating veggies and fruits in gardens  we ignored ourselves so pause  the watering pause  okay  so that is not  my definition of veganism  but if that is  your definition of veganism  is that such a terrible thing  are you describing a dystopia  are you describing hell on earth when  you say people stitching their own  clothes again that's not my ideal  but if i met someone who strove for that  idea who just made their own clothes and  so then built their i have known some  people like that frankly i knew a guy  who built his own house says no it's not  worth telling the story  you know i've known various i've known  various people built their own house  remember one guy who built it entirely  using you know recycled tires you know  we get old truck tires and you stack  them up and then you fill it up with uh  concrete you pour the concrete and then  you make this very stable structure and  so on i've known different eccentrics  who did but like do you think you're  describing  hell on earth when you say this to me  this is not my definition of veganism at  all what you're saying here like from my  perspective it's neither good nor bad  it's irrelevant to veganism like you can  be vegan and build your own house and  you can be vegan and rent somebody  else's rent an apartment like to me it's  in this sense it's spurious it's  irrelevant right but that doesn't  doesn't mean it's good or bad if you are  enthusiastic about architecture you can  build your own house if you're  enthusiastic about i've known people who  made their own clothes it's not that  uncommon if you're enthusiastic about  fashion you can make your own clothes  this is  irrelevant to vegan okay  but your implicit point is that not  everyone can do it therefore it's  impossible  and as i explained it length earlier in  the video when you say impossible what  you really mean is it's unthinkable  for you  you can't think it through  do you  want to drive a fancy car  do you  want to own  an italian car  it's impossible for everyone  to own  an italian sports car a car made in it  it's impossible  china  india europe america brazil  not everyone  in the world can own an italian sports  car therefore  how dare you  does that make sense  therefore  it's impossible for you therefore it's  unattainable for you  and again we gotta calibrate these  claims about impossibility learning to  play the piano was really hard learning  to speak chinese is hard to learn  for me  for me  owning an italian sports car would be  really hard guys it would be i can't say  i'm now 43 years old if i made it my  goal to own an italian sports card  italian made sports car by age 53 you  tell me you think i can do it some of  you guys have done it some of you are  driving an italian sports car right now  you know support me on patreon okay if  you can afford an italian sports car you  should be paying  five dollars a month on patreon as part  of this youtube gym  so i have basically zero money in the  world now age 43. do you think i could  have an italian sports car by 53 not  easy  i could do it it's not impossible i  could do it what  would it mean to say  that it's impossible for everyone in the  world to be a hundred percent italian  sports car drivers like what's what's  the point what's the salience it seems  silly too that's why i'm dealing with it  in such  depth right like i'm not just going to  ridicule them just oh it's a fallacy  appeal to nature fallacy you know appeal  the futility fallacy you know etc a lot  of people want you to do this i'm really  talking this through with you i'm  holding your hand as you walk through it  and some of you in the audience there's  going to be someone you love enough  someone you care about and if someone  you respect enough to go through it like  this right  okay  not  everyone can be a medical doctor  you can  maybe not your brother maybe not your  sister but you  what if 100 of the population became  medical doctors society would implode  who would farm the food who would be a  police officer  who would join the army  not everyone can be a medical doctor you  can  should you different question not  everyone can own an italian made sports  car should you is it a good idea  like you know i'm open to the  possibility maybe nobody should drive an  italian sports car like maybe that's  really the ethical conclusion is that no  this is unfit for human being i feel  nobody should gamble you know it's just  an example so i'm totally opposed to i  think nobody should gamble at a casino  most people disagree with me they  tolerate gambling to whatever extent  right but maybe you make an argument  that fancy sports car should be bad but  i'm saying  some people get on a sports car and  there's just  no contradiction in it right but okay  what if  we lived in a world  where 100 of people  were trying  to own  an italian sports car  and at any given time 90 of them were  failing  does that sound a lot like life in the  united states of america right now this  isn't a lot like life in california or  in detroit michigan  where everyone lives this consumerist  fantasy that they can be the next one to  get rich they can be the next one to  have that italian sports car it's not  everyone in america a huge percent of  the population in america a huge  percentage of people in america  they want to own that sports car they  want to be rich and they want to show  off their wealth those that  set of cultural values and they know not  everyone can win they know they're going  to be winners and losers maybe 10 of  people are gonna get that wealthy that  they get to buy that italian sports car  okay so what is it like to live in a  society where a hundred percent of  people  have that impossible unattainable dream  and where a hundred percent of people  are striving for that impossible  unattainable dream and ninety percent  are failing is that hell on earth  okay now i want to ask you what would be  so [ __ ] terrible about living in a  society where 100 of people want to make  their own clothes as a hobby they just  want to buy the cloth and stitch the  clothes  for their own ethical reasons to really  what is so [ __ ] bad about living in a  society where people want to buy an axe  and chop lumber and build their own  house you can i've seen it done  i've seen people building a house with  their own hands but one of my  grandfathers built his own house i saw  people in laos and cambodia doing it  with no money in third world conditions  you can watch youtube videos of people  doing it's not impossible  okay 10-year plan i'm 43  what's more attainable by 53 do you  think i can learn to stitch my own  clothing and and build up a wooden hut  live like [ __ ] hori devi toro i can  live like henry david thoreau  make my own hut  i can that's easy  by 50 of course i could do that next  five years ten five years next ten years  you can make a plan you can too okay but  i'm scaling it up here i don't know if i  can buy a fancy sports car 10 years now  that seems less likely to me right  it just seems like a less attainable  goal from now a hundred thousand dollars  to the car up front and then you have  all these costs after yeah whatever just  say which one is more attainable you  know you want to build a hut in the  woods you want to stitch your own  clothing you can do it but this is my  point what if you lived in a culture  again these are not my values it's not  my dream  what if you live in a culture where 100  of people idealize that outcome that's  the goal they're working towards they  wish they could make their own clothes  they wish they could build their own  house they wish they could be ethically  responsible for the food they eat and  the wood that makes up the walls of  their house and they try they try the  best they can the same [ __ ] way 99 of  people today are trying to get rich or  die like they're trying to get rich and  they don't care whose neck they have to  step on to get it they're trying to get  rich and they don't care how much damage  they do they don't care about the  consequences so many people with this  attitude get rich or die trying get rich  and they don't care who they rip off or  who gets poor because they're getting  rich so many people want that italian  sports car you want to do any unethical  thing for it all right that's the  dystopia we live in now what is so  [ __ ] bad about living in a society  about living in a dystopia living in a  terrible site where 100 of people are  striving for this ideal you describe of  being 100 vegan as you define it not as  i define it being 100 responsible for  the wood that's in the rafters of your  house and of making your own clothes all  right that would not be so terrible at  all  and yeah it costs money okay i've i've  done it i've bought cloth and gone to a  tailor and it's sat there and watched as  the tailor may close out of the cloth  once you've got the neck down it doesn't  take very many minutes only take a few  minutes to make a shirt or a jacket out  of a piece of cloth you can sit there  and chit chat with a tailor well they  make now the reason it's easy for them  they've done it a thousand times before  this is someone who's their hands and  their mind has practiced this a thousand  times they take a piece of chalk and a  ruler and they sketch it out this is  you'd be amazed how quick it is it's why  you can do it in a factory too right do  churn out thousands of shirts okay you  could you can do that all right it would  cost you some money you have to own a  pair of scissors you have to own a big  flat table i'm just talking the reality  i've seen a tailor do this for myself so  it's basically she had she had a a metal  ruler a heavy ruler to hold the fabric  flat a pair of scissors  a piece of chalk a needle and thread  that costs less than buying an italian  sports car it probably costs less than  one vacation  one beach vacation anywhere in the world  to buy everything you need to make your  own clothes i knew another woman who  made her own clothes and dyed them too  so what did she own she owned a bucket  for the die she owned a sewing machine  what does a sewing machine cost compared  to a car  second hand sewing machine versus a  second hank are you kidding me second  answering machine compared to a fancy  sports car this costs nothing it's  totally attainable it's attainable for  the working poor you have a job at a  factory and live this fantasy you're  talking about so even if i think it's a  stupid [ __ ] fantasy  even if i myself am totally comfortable  buying items made in a factory you know  produced under  ethically dubious conditions i may be  comfortable with all kinds of ethical  compromises this is not my ideal of  veganism this is not my ideal of a  morally responsible life but if it is  your ideal one it's attainable for you  and two our society is not going to  become a dystopia if 100 of people start  yearning and striving for it and 90 of  people fail live their whole lives  frustrated there'd be a beautiful  society you're describing society i'll  never know  okay  what if you lived in a society where the  ideal was for everyone to be a medical  doctor  ninety percent of people fail maybe ten  percent of people come medical doctor  but every kid going through school  they're competing and studying the exams  they're trying to know as much as  possible about the history of medical  science they all know the names of the  scientists who make great discoveries  and breakthroughs and the people they  look up to and admire are the foremost  surgeons the foremost health researchers  the foremost experts in society and and  maybe 90 of people have their heart  broken because they have an incredibly  competitive system where only the best  of the best can become medical doctors  and everyone's proud if they become a  medical doctor those are your  cultural values is that is that a  dystopia  is that a terrible site it's impossible  for 100 of people to be doctors it's not  impossible for 100 up for 100 of people  to want to be medical doctors democracy  it's impossible to have a hundred  percent of people participate in  democracy it's impossible to have 100 of  people participate as equals  specifically it's right we can get into  a lot of different more specific  definitions of democracy and talk about  the ways in which it's impossible to  have a hundred percent maybe it's even  impossible to have 55 percent of people  right okay but you can have a society  where a hundred percent of people strive  to have that kind of democracy where  that's the ideal 100 percent of people  want they want to live in that democracy  they know the difference between life in  thailand and life in myanmar they know  the difference between life in thailand  and life in laos between life in  thailand life in cambodia and say look  here we are in thailand we have  some  democracy  some and we're surrounded by countries  that have  none that have zero and hey hey guys  let's get motivated we should all be  willing to fight and die to have as much  democracy as possible and maybe thailand  within my lifetime can become just as  democratic as japan just as democratic  as south korea maybe just as democratic  as switzerland can pick different models  right  can it be as democratic as ancient  athens or something we can get into get  into real questions this way all right  um yes you can have a society where a  hundred percent of people  try  to participate in democracy as equals  and ninety percent  fail and you have a wonderful society  as a result you fail and fail and fail  as individuals and collectively as a  society as a whole you succeed  right  and the fundamental thesis one of the  fundamental theses i think of bernie  bernard demandeville's fable of the bees  is to to get you thinking in this way  the way in which  as a society  in its economic totality right everyone  can be lying and cheating and stealing  and everyone can be failing  and yet  you know the economy as a whole your  republic as a whole your society as a  whole or whatever it is it flourishes  like it flourishes the aggregate of all  these bad intentions can produce  something positive and there is if you  go to los angeles right now  i think there's a sense even if it's a  really cynical sense right  it's a really cynical sense in which you  can say the dynamism of los angeles is  created by all these people who want to  get rich they may have terrible  motivations and they all want to own  that italian sports car they don't want  to drive down  uh sepuldeva boulevard  in their their italian sports car it's a  terrible motivation  and yet a certain kind of positive  dynamism comes out of it  wanting to be ethically responsible for  the construction materials your house is  made up is a wonderful motivation to  have and wonderful things come out of it  wanting to be a medical doctor  in some ways it's wonderful in some ways  it's horrible okay how does that compare  to a society where everyone just wants  to get rich and they don't care who they  have to stab in the back who they have  to lie to cheat or steal who's neck  that's stefan said  you know  politics  is centrally about  impossible  things  peace  is impossible  the only peace you're ever going to have  is in the shadow of war  politics is entirely about  creating and sustaining peace no matter  how phony insincere tragic  self-advocating the basis is you know  something as  simple as that equality is impossible in  a million ways sorry if you don't have  brothers and sisters you can't visualize  this i'm not equal to my brothers and  sisters we have you know the same  genetics approximately i've more  genetically in common with my brothers  and sisters than anyone else on planet  earth so far as i understand the science  right even a half brother right even a  half sister i have more in common with  them genetically than anyone else  on the planet they're not my equals and  they can't be and they won't be i don't  even want to try  to be my equals and some of you know  what this is like some of you don't you  have brothers and sisters who are  alcoholics or whatever you know  let alone when you you look at society  as a whole just think about your your  grade six class  the kids you used to sit down in the  classroom with in grade six you're not  all equals right you can yearn for  equality right you can try for the  impossible you can aim for the  impossible you can have a society of  people who desire  equality  right and and work toward that  impossible goal and a lot of positive  things can come out of trying and  failing  right you can have a whole society that  yearns for atheism yearns for a secular  or scientific society but i'm just going  to say atheism because i think it's more  honest we're never going to have 100  atheism you know i've met people  there are people who are born and raised  atheists they have atheist parents and  they nevertheless go out on their own  and join a crazy cult and become  you know it happens all the time my  point is like reinventing the wheel  people will reinvent barbaric notions  okay we can yearn for we can strive for  a 100  atheist society instead of resigning  ourselves to right the darkness of the  dark age is going on forever and so much  that's positive will come out of that  yearning that trying that that failure  right  so the impossible  it's not some kind of footnote  in political science  politics is really centrally and  integrally  about the impossible  two types of impossible things  thinkable  and unthinkable  and what people like me try to do  dissident intellectuals  creative artists  right  is to take things that are unthinkable  and make them thinkable to take you  hand in hand and ask you to step with me  into the truly unknown  to get you asking yourself questions  you've never asked before  to get you coming up with answers you've  never thought of before right it's very  easy to think it's impossible to have an  atheist society right again during the  french revolution think about how new  and different this was right  it's very easy for people to resign  themselves to the thought that a vegan  society is impossible everything  everything seems impossible  when you haven't done it before  in the year  1850  a society with fundamental equality  between black people and white people  seemed impossible a society that was  fundamentally accepting of homosexuals  seemed impossible okay a hundred years  later in 1950  still for the vast majority of americans  for the vast majority of people in  western europe those things seemed  impossible political equality for blacks  and whites political equality for  homosexuals and heterosexuals in 1950 in  europe look at how many countries women  could even vote in in europe right  it seemed  unthinkable  right  and people like me had to make it  thinkable  right but some of these things you're  talking about as impossible they're not  just possible they're thinkable and  they're very they're very powerful in  shaping uh political discourse  in our times  all right guys if you guys have another  question you have a comment now is a  good time to leave it you can hit thumbs  up  the rest of what this guy wrote to me  under this heading i'm going to turn off  my phone now i don't think there's  anything more worth reading the rest of  what he said  very much fell into our great european  tradition of  judge not lest you be judged  and i'm talking about this because it's  linked in his mind and i think it's  linked in the minds of  many people in the modern world  um so point one is  veganism is impossible  all right an unattainable ideal for  individuals and scaling it up for  society as well that's the claim i've  just  refuted this or responded this  thoroughly for three hours solid  um  okay and then linked to this  is this great canard in our civilization  of judge not lest you be judged you  shouldn't think you're morally spirit  anyone else you shouldn't think your  ethical ideas are better than anyone  else's we're all just poor sinners  etc etc now guys  i don't have to repeat myself  there is a moral difference  between george w bush  and al gore  all right  and you do not have to believe that al  gore pardon me you do not have to  believe that al gore is a good person  you do not have to believe he is a great  person  al gore  was a better person  than george w bush  and that difference you may think of as  quite subtle or hard to see like it's  it's not obvious at first glance  it's not just worth voting for it's not  just worth talking about  it's worth fighting and dying for okay  i think the american people should hang  their heads in shame  that there wasn't a civil war  when it was revealed as a matter of fact  that the elections in florida were  fraudulent that year okay now i mean  this is an objective fact  there was fraud it was an illegitimate  election in the state of florida not the  whole united states america  in one state  in florida  it was a manipulated election and that  one state  decided the outcome where it was very  close election who was willing to stand  up and fight and die  for democracy who was willing to stand  up and fight and die  for al gore  nobody  all right and i've got to tell you  something  there's a real sense in which that's the  death of democracy in america because it  reflects the profound inertia the  profound indifference towards democracy  that continues to be prevalent  to this day  far be it for me to suggest that every  problem in democracy can be solved by  civil war or violence  but you know you should read  machiavelli's discourses on this  not machiavelli's the prince  machiavelli's discourses two different  books mickey village discourses are  really the important one but machiavelli  was one of those guys who was really  willing to be honest  about the extent to which if you want to  have a republic  you have to be willing to pay the price  in blood not just once  every generation again and again and  again  i think there are a lot of people in  afghanistan right now  who are hanging their heads in shame  asking why didn't more of us fight for  democracy and by the way that will  include a lot of moderate muslims there  are a lot of people in afghanistan who  are muslim they're just less muslim than  the taliban less religious than the  taliban who are now hanging their heads  in shame saying look we had a better  society we had the possibility of a much  better society flourishing and growing  out of it but we were not willing to pay  the price and blood there were not  enough  heroes among us who stood up to fight  and die  for that now i'll give you a parallel in  western europe in case you didn't hear  at one point france got conquered by the  nazis remember that  now eventually with time  you know there was this grassroots  guerrilla movement that resisted the  nazis that developed but guys the  reality of the extent to which the  french elite and french institutions  just began working for the germans the  extent to which the french became a  colony of the germans and became  implicated and part of the fascist  history of of germany you know is  it's such a source of national shame  that you will nowhere see it mentioned  in any french history textbooks you know  the extent to which france and germany  from that point on were on the same side  in world war ii people like to say the  vichy regime the ichy if you don't know  the history of it it's worth it's worth  looking at and france has had to hang  its head its head in shame ever since  the french have had to be aware there  just were not enough heroes in france  there were not enough people willing to  fight and die  for  the future of democracy  um so this is my response to the trope  all of you are going to have to deal  with it even if you're watching this and  you're not vegan  this trope  who are you to judge  you know this idea that ethically  we're all  equal okay no we're not  george w bush is not ethically equal  to  al gore  all right  um  field marshall patan  the man who took over france and ruled  it on behalf of the nazis handed love  with with the germans he's not  ethically equal to having a  democratically elected  president and prime minister et cetera  in a french society he's not the  difference between peyton and the  democratic alternative to payton however  you want to think of that whether you  think of it as the prime minister had to  flee for his life or you know think of  it as whoever  i mean whoever would have hypothetically  replaced bethan after a revolutionary  war civil wars fought against peyton and  patanisma and fought against vichy or  something okay no it really matters okay  i mean again whatever with germany again  there's no easy personality to oppose to  adolf hitler the difference between  adolf hitler whoever would have ruled  germany hypothetically if you had a  democratic society you had elections  stalin and whoever would have  hypothetically ruled russia if you had a  real working democracy in elections  the dictator of north korea right now  and if you want to say compare it to the  reality of government in south korea or  again the hypothetical government they  could have no  ethically  we have to deal with  fundamental  inequalities  great  and small  some people are stupid  some people are lazy  some people are  ignorant  and some people  are cowards  all i can ask you is  what about  you  what kind of person  are you  going to be  and what now  what next  in the next five years in the next 50  years  with that self-knowledge with that  awareness of your own specialness  relative to george w bush relative to  alexandria ocasio-cortez certainly  relative to the imbeciles we've had  leading to the vegan movement every  single one of you in this audience is  more intelligent than james aspie i  suspect most of you are more intelligent  than aoc uh ocasio-cortez i suspect  maybe i'm wrong like but every single  one of you is smarter than durianrider  every single one of you is smarter than  james aspie i go on and on every single  one of you is smarter than nina and  randa nelson  right none of you are taking away the  leadership role from them right none of  you are leading the positive ecological  and ethical change we all know we  desperately need as we count down the  years towards irreversible damage due to  climate change so we count down the  years with billions of animals being  tortured to death and all this other  stuff  right it's really easy to think oh  hypothetically what you would have done  if you were alive in france during world  war two hypothetic it's not hypothetical  right the revolution is now it's  happening all the time or it's not  happening all the time because of your  laziness your indolence what happened  back in the year 2000 elections with  george w bush taking over the government  when there was fraud in florida who  stood up who fought  who showed some backbone who said  democracy is worth fighting and dying  for you refused to be ruled by a  government that wasn't legitimately  elected due to palpable fraud  legally i mean palpable there was  physical evidence of the fraud i don't  want to get all the details here okay  it's not a matter of opinion there was  palpable irrefutable evidence of the  fraud that happened in the in the state  of florida all right  through your silence through your  conformity through your complicity you  too  become part of the problem and when  people look back on those events just as  they look back on what happened in  france during world war ii right what's  most astonishing of all  is the ease and comfort of continuing in  your bourgeois existence  instead of rising to the challenge  instead of pressing for the fundamental  social culture and political change that  we all know is necessary  i'm addressing  this video  to those  who will be heroes  whether  they know it or not